WELCOME TO THE
WEDNESDAY MARCH 15 20 30
ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE
ENTIRE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT THIS MEETING SIMILARLY
TO AN IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOM ONLY SPEAK
DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC COMING
OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND THE MEETING I DID
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN A THE LIKE THIS
IN ALSO AVAILABLE ON THE
PUBLISHED PUBLISHED AGENDA IN
THE PUBLIC NOTICES SECTION
OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND ON THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING ON
CHANNEL 19.
ALL RIGHT.
SO I WILL NOW ASK CHRIS TO
PLEASE CALL NOW KOMAROW I'VE
RECEIVED REQUEST FROM
COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE AND
COMMISSIONER LEE WHO WILL NOT
BE ABLE TO ATTEND PLEASE STAY
HERE FROM WHERE YOU'RE DRIVING
AND WHEN YOUR NAME IS CALLED
COMMISSIONER DOLAN HERE AND OUR
COMMISSIONER EICHMAN HERE, ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONER BOVON HERE
FROM ANN, OUR COMMISSIONER OUT
TO MIKEY HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
>> COMMISSIONER HERE FOR ME I'M
COMMISSIONER KILLER INFORMATION
COMMISSIONER CLAMAN, YOU'RE
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
>> ARE IS ABSENT COMMISSIONER
GRISCHA YOU'RE FROM
COMMISSIONER WEINKAUF AND
SUZETTE IS ACTUALLY IN THE
ATTENDEE WAITING ROOM.
I THINK SHE'LL BE COMING OVER
IN JUST A SECOND.
I'M TRYING TO PROMOTE HER.
OK, COMMISSIONER HAS HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE MATURA
AND COMMISSIONER STUKA ARE
ABSOLUTE ALSO THAT ONE UP
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
I WAS ATTENDED BY MISTAKE.
THANK YOU.
>> OK, WE ARE GOOD TO GO.
OK WE HAVE A QUORUM BUT REAL
QUICKLY BEFORE THE CONSENT
AGENDA I JUST WANT TO SAY THANK
YOU TO THIS COMMISSION FOR
ALLOWING ME TO CHAIR THE
MEETING AND BUT IN PARTICULAR I
WANT TO THANK MOLLY FOR HER
THREE YEARS OF BEING A
SPECTACULAR CHAIR AND GETTING
THIS COMMISSION HEADED IN A
WONDERFUL DIRECTION NOT JUST
THE DIRECTION BUT THE AMOUNT
OF PROGRESS THATVE MADE HAS
BEEN REALLY IMPRESSIVE AND I
THINK WE I FEEL THIS WAY.
I THINK WE ALL OWE MOLLY A BIG
DEBT OF GRATITUDE FOR WHAT
SHE'S DONE ON THIS COMMISSION.
SO EVERYONE PLEASE THANK MOLLY
.
I DIRECT YOU TO KNOW I WILL TRY
MY BEST TO CONTINUE IN HER
FOOTSTEPS BUT I'M JUST GLAD
THAT MOLLY IS STAYING ON THE
COMMISSION.
SHE'S NOT GOING ANYWHERE I
DON'T THINK AND SO HOPEFULLY
NOT BEING CHAIR WILL FREE HER
UP TO BE EVEN MORE ACTIVE.
SO ANYWAY THANK YOU MOLLY.
MOVING ON TO APPROVAL OF A
CONSENT AGENDA THERE ARE TWO
ITEMS ON THE CONSENT AGENDA
APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA AND
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
>> ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS
TO THE CONSENT AGENDA?
>> OK, SEEING NONE IF THERE IS
A MOTION TO APPROVE A CONSENT
AGENDA AS PRESENTED.
ALL RIGHT, DARMA AND SECONDED
BY MEGHAN SO ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION PLEASE RAISE
THEIR HANDS OR STAY ON MUTE AND
SAY YES.
>> ALL THOSE OPPOSED SAY NO.
ALL RIGHT.
SUCH AGENDA IS APPROVED.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NOW WE MOVE ON TO THE PUBLIC
COMMENT PORTION.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN, PLEASE
CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND
INTERMEETING ID NINE THREE FOUR
SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE
ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECTIVITIES AS
DESCRIBED IN THE AGENDA, CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HANDS ONE BY
ONE USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR BY THE
PERSON ZOOMING IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
HAND BUTTON INTO YOU WILL HEAR
AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT
THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO
SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
MUTE ANY TELEVISION BACKGROUND
SOUND SO THAT WE MAY HEAR YOU
CLEARLY
.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
RAYMOND YEAH AND WE HAVE A WE
HAVE A TIMER THREE MINUTE TIMER
GOING I THINK RIGHT.
DIDN'T WANT ME TO DO THAT OR
YES I CAN TAKE CARE OF THAT.
OK, VERY GOOD.
YES WE DO HAVE OUR FIRST
SPEAKER WITH YOUR HAND RAISED
RITA ROSS.
I'VE GIVEN YOU THE FOUR THE
FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> THANK YOU.
I REPRESENT THE ONE HUNDRED
SEVENTY FOUR PROPERTY OWNERS
OF YOUR VILLAGE HOMES AS ITS
PRESIDENT.
AS YOU KNOW WE OPPOSE THE ROAD
PROJECT ALTHOUGH OUR VILLAGE
OWNERS HAVE PARTICIPATED IN ALL
OF THE COMMUNITY MEETINGS AND
SUGGESTED OTHER DESIGN
SCENARIOS, THE CITY HAS BEEN
SOMEWHAT DISMISSIVE.
WE WANT TO KNOW HOW YOU COULD
ACCEPT A DESIGN THAT DIMINISHES
THE LEVEL OF SERVICE AS
REPORTED IN A MEMO DATED
FEBRUARY 15 TWO THOUSAND
NINETEEN FROM GRACE CROW AND
CYNTHIA RENNINGER HUTCHINSON
WHERE IS THE DATA TO JUSTIFY
SPENDING TAXPAYER MONEY ON
PROJECTS THAT REDUCE THE LEVEL
OF SERVICE ALSO THE CITY'S
UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT
CODE STIPULATES THAT PROPOSALS
CONTRIBUTING TO A LEVEL
OF SERVICE OF YOUR STAFF CAN BE
DENIED BY CITY COUNCIL.
BUT WHY SHOULD THE SAME
STIPULATION NOT APPLY TO
EXISTING ROADS WHEN
IMPLEMENTING ROAD GUYOT'S?
WE BELIEVE THERE IS ROOM TO
CONSIDER MORE THAN ONE DESIGN
FOR EXAMPLE THE GATTI'S ROAD
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT THE CITY
COLLABORATED WITH PRIVATE
PROPERTY OWNERS AND MADE
ADJUSTMENTS WHICH RESULTED IN A
SHARED USE PATH AND BIKE LANE
SINCE ERHART ROAD CURRENTLY HAS
FOUR LANES AND THE PROPOSAL
REDUCES THE ROAD TO TWO LANES,
THERE IS SUFFICIENT ROOM FOR
OTHER DESIGNS AS PROPOSED THE
CITY WILL PAINT CHEVRON LINES
OVER ACCESS ROAD SURFACE LET'S
USE THAT ACCESS ROAD SURFACE,
MOVE THE DRIVING LANE NEXT TO
THE MEDIAN AND USE THE ACCESS
ROAD FOR A BIKE LANE AND A
WALKING PATH OR A LARGER SHARED
PATH.
CONSTRUCTING A SIDEWALK OUTSIDE
OF THE EXISTING ROAD WILL
INCREASE THE OVERALL WIDTH
OF THE CORRIDOR WHICH WILL
NEGATIVELY IMPACT THE GOAL
OF REDUCING AUTO SPEEDS KEEPING
INTACT THE EXISTING PROPERTY
LINE AND MATURE TREES CREATES A
NARROW ROAD VIRTUAL UNKNOWN
FACTOR IN REDUCING AUTO SPEEDS.
IF YOU CONSTRUCT A SIDEWALK AS
PROPOSED, SIGNIFICANT GAPS WILL
CONTINUE INTO PERPETUITY.
THE ROUTE THROUGH BUS STOP AT
THE CORNER OF AREHART AND
GHETTY ROADS IS LOCATED JUST
WEST OF AREHART ROAD.
SO MANY USING THAT STOP WOULD
HAVE USED THE EXISTING WESTERN
SIDEWALK.
ALL THE SCHOOLS, CHURCHES AND
OTHER TRIBUTARIES STREETS TO
KING ELEMENTARY ARE UNDER
CONNECT TO THE WESTERN
SIDEWALK.
ALL RESIDENTS LIVING ON THE
EASTERN SIDE MUST CROSS THEIR
HEART ROAD AT SOME POINT TO
REACH THOSE DESTINATION THEY
WILL USE THE CLOSEST CROSSWALK
TO GET ON THE WEST SIDE THE
STREET AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
WE BELIEVE THE GOAL SHOULD BE
REDUCING OVERALL ROAD SPEED AND
ON CREATING ADEQUATE AND
PROPERLY DESIGNED CROSSWAY
RATHER THAN FILLING GAPS THAT
WILL REMAIN INTO PERPETUITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK.
DO WE HAVE ANOTHER HAND RAISED
AGAIN TO PRESS STAR NINE OR OR
ZOOM TO COME TO MY THANK YOU
BUT I DO HAVE A FAIR NUMBER
OF ATTENDEES BUT I DON'T SEE
ANYONE WITH THEIR HAND RAISED
AT THE MOMENT
.
>> LAST CALLER OR ANY PEOPLE
HAVE DIALED IN TO THE MEETING
TONIGHT WHO WISH TO SPEAK
DURING PUBLIC COMMENT AS BRANT
MENTIONED, YOU CAN HIT STAR
NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR HIT THE
RAISE HAND FUNCTION AND ZOOM
SOMEONE DO JUST RAISE YOUR
HANDS DIDI I HAVE GONE AHEAD
AND ALLOWED YOU TO TOP THE
FLOOR IS YOURS.
I THANK YOU.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES WE CAN.
I LIVE ON GREENHILLS DRIVE.
I'M A RESIDENT NEIGHBOR AND A
CITIZEN HERE AND I WANTED TO
SAY THAT WE APPRECIATE ALL THE
WORK ON THIS PLAN BUT IN
GENERAL THE RESIDENTS AND
NEIGHBORS IN THIS AREA CONSIDER
IT OVERKILL.
WE DID NOT ASK FOR ALL THE
BELLS WHISTLES THAT APPEAR TO
BE A PART OF THIS TEN YEAR LONG
PROJECT.
WE DON'T WANT THEM ALL.
IT'S TOO MUCH THE EXISTING
GENEROUS ROADWAY THAT RITA HAS
JUST MENTIONED HAS PLENTY
OF SURFACE AREA TO WORK WITH
WITHIN THE EXISTING CURBS
THERE'S PLACE TO PAINT
GUIDELINES FOR AUTO BICYCLE
LANES NO NEED FOR BOLLARDS AND
SPEAKING AS A WALKER, A CYCLIST
AND A DRIVER, I REQUEST THAT
YOU WOULD FOCUS ON THE
FUNDAMENTALS.
I THINK MOST OF US ARE ON BOARD
WITH ADDING THE ROUNDABOUTS
WHICH WOULD MODERATE THE AUTO
SPEEDS AND BE A BIG CHANGE WITH
A BIG IMPACT AND THEN RESURFACE
THE ROAD.
THAT'S WHAT WE WANT.
WE'VE WANTING SO I WOULD
SUGGEST THAT WE THEN PARE BACK
EVERYTHING ELSE, GET IT DONE
QUICKLY AND THEN REDIRECT ANY
EXCESS FUNDING TO ALL THE OTHER
END OF THE ROAD THAT ALSO
REALLY NEED RESURFACING AND SO
FORTH.
THIS IS WHAT WE THE PEOPLE THE
CITIZENS OF THESE NEIGHBORHOODS
WANT FROM YOU AND I THINK IF WE
WOULD TAKE A FRESH LOOK AT THIS
DESIGN SEEMS OVERLY COMPLICATED
AND I THINK WE COULD DO BETTER.
I REALLY DON'T WANT TO SEE US
FIXING PROBLEMS THAT DON'T
EXIST OR TRYING TO FORCE A ONE
SIZE FITS ALL SOLUTION INTO OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THANK THANK YOU.
LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE ANOTHER ONE
RANDOM.
>> WE DO ADAM.
I'VE GONE AHEAD AND ALLOWED YOU
TO SPEAK THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> HI MY NAME IS ADAM SAVAGE IN
THE FOURTH WARD.
I WASN'T GOING TO SPEAK TONIGHT
BUT BECAUSE THERE'S REALLY
NOTHING TO DO WITH THESE
SIDEWALKS ON THIS AGENDA AS FAR
AS I KNOW.
BUT SINCE OTHER PEOPLE WERE
CALLING IN I FELT I SHOULD JUST
SPEAK UP AS A RESIDENT TO AND I
SUPPORT THIS PROJECT.
I BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD PUT
THESE SIDEWALKS IN.
I HAVE NO CONCERN ABOUT LEVEL
OF SERVICE.
IN FACT I I DON'T REALLY THINK
WE SHOULD BE PUTTING AS MUCH
EMPHASIS ON LEVEL OF SERVICE AS
WE DO WHEN REDOING STREETS IN
THE CITY AND I THINK WE SHOULD
GO FULL SPEED AHEAD WITH ADDING
SIDEWALKS AND BIKE LANES AND
DOING EVERYTHING WE CAN TO MAKE
THIS OR SAFER FOR EVERYONE WHO
USES IT WHETHER AT PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS OR DRIVERS.
THANK YOU.
>> ANYONE ELSE CAN PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE OR RAISE HANDS.
YOU WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
NOT
SEEING ANY ADDITIONAL HANDS
RAISED RED YEP.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
WELL THEN LET'S MOVE ON TO THE
BUSINESS PORTION OF THE MEETING
.
FIRST UP IS A SPIN AGREEMENT
AMENDMENT FOR EA BIKES.
INCLUDED IN OUR PACKET IS THE
DRAFT RESOLUTION THAT'S
SCHEDULED TO GO TO CITY COUNCIL
FOR THE POSSIBLE ADDITION
OF SHARED E BIKES PROVIDED BY
SPEM AND THAT'S ALL I ASK
RAYMOND TO GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THE PROPOSAL AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT WE ALL MAY HAVE
AND THEN AT THE END OF THAT
WE'LL ASK THE COMMISSION FOR A
MOTION ON THIS.
>> SO RAYMON.
YEAH, THANKS BRETT.
I KNOW WE'VE PREVIOUSLY
REPORTED ON THIS TO YOU BUT
SINCE WE ARE TAKING THIS TO THE
CITY COUNCIL FOR THEIR
CONSIDERATION AND POSSIBLE
APPROVAL, WE THOUGHT WE SHOULD
BRING IT TO YOU FIRST.
SO SORRY YOU DIDN'T GET THIS
LAST MONTH.
IT WAS STILL KIND OF BEING
FINALIZED.
BUT NOW THIS IS THE FINAL
VERSION THAT'S BOTH IN YOUR
PACKET AS WELL AS CITY
COUNCIL'S PACKET ALL THE SAME
MATERIALS.
SO GENERALLY SPEAKING, I THINK
MANY OF YOU KNOW, SPIN HAS BEEN
OPERATING E SCOOTERS IN THE
COMMUNITY SINCE TWO THOUSAND
NINETEEN.
THE INITIAL DEPLOYMENT STARTED
WITH TWO HUNDRED SCOOTERS AND
THAT HAS SLOWLY RAMPED UP TO
FOUR SCOOTERS BASED ON THE
DEMAND IN THE COMMUNITY AND
TRYING TO FIND A NICE BALANCE
WHERE THERE ISN'T A LOT
OF CLUTTER AND WHAT HAVE YOU.
THERE'S LONG BEEN TALK ABOUT
RELAUNCHING BIKE SHARE AND THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
BEFORE MY TIME HERE AT THE CITY
THERE WAS NO BIKE.
SOME OF YOU MAY RECALL THAT
THAT WAS A DUCT SYSTEM.
IT WAS A BICYCLE SYSTEM AS I
UNDERSTAND IT BICYCLES, A
SUBSIDIARY AND MY DOCTOR I MEAN
YOU WOULD GO UP TO A DOCKING
STATION ON A SLIDE A CREDIT
CARD, CHECK A BIKE OUT, RIDE IT
AROUND, RETURN BACK TO THE
DOCKING STATION TO KIND
OF RELEASE THE RIDE.
THAT SYSTEM WAS DISCONTINUED
FOR NUMEROUS REASONS THAT I'M
PROBABLY NOT FAMILIAR WITH ALL
OF THEM BUT SO WE'VE BEEN
WITHOUT A BIKE SHARE SYSTEM
SINCE ABOUT TWENTY SEVENTEEN OR
SO.
WE WERE VERY CLOSE TO
RELAUNCHING THAT SYSTEM RIGHT
BEFORE A PANDEMIC.
IT ACTUALLY I THINK IT WAS LIKE
ONE OF THE LAST MEETINGS I WENT
TO AND IT JUST NEVER GOT OFF
THE GROUND SO SINCE THEN SINCE
TWENTY TWENTY WE'VE BEEN IN
DISCUSSIONS WITH DIFFERENT
PRIVATE MOBILITY PROVIDERS THAT
PROVIDE THESE SERVICES AND
SINCE WE HAVE AN EXISTING
RELATIONSHIP WITH SPIN THEY NOW
OFFER THAT IN THEIR FLEET
OF VEHICLES AS WELL.
SO WE'VE BEEN IN DISCUSSIONS
WITH THEM FOR A WHILE AND THEY
ARE WILLING TO BRING ONE
HUNDRED OF THEIR BIKES TO THE
COMMUNITY.
THE ONE NOTE HERE, THE ONE
CATCH IF IT WERE IS THAT THEY
ARE ASKING FOR A REDUCED FEE.
WE CURRENTLY CHARGE
ONE DOLLAR
PER SCOOTER PER DAY FOR THEIR
FLEET TO BE DEPLOYED IN ANN
ARBOR.
THEY'RE ASKING THAT THAT FEE BE
BROUGHT DOWN TO TWENTY CENTS
PER VEHICLE PER DAY.
SO THAT WOULD APPLY TO BOTH THE
SCOOTERS AND THE BIKES AND THAT
FEE WOULD ONLY BE IN EFFECT AND
AS LONG AS THERE ARE BIKES
WITHIN THE FLEET BECAUSE THAT
REDUCTION IN FEE IS MEANT TO
HELP OFFSET SOME OF THE ADDED
COSTS OF DEPLOYING AND HE BIKE
SYSTEM OF THE VEHICLES ARE MORE
EXPENSIVE.
THEY'RE HEAVIER TO TRANSPORT
AND REBALANCE REQUIRING MORE
LABOR.
SO IT IS KIND OF A A
CONDITIONAL SORT OF REDUCED FEE
.
>> THIS IS CONSISTENT WITH THE
VISION ZERO TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
THERE ARE STRATEGIES ABOUT
MICRO MOBILITY AND HOW MICRO
MOBILITY ESPECIALLY SHARED
SYSTEMS CAN HELP PROVIDE FIRST
MILE LAST MILE CONNECTIONS.
>> THE IDEA BEING THAT IF YOU
TAKE A BUS TO DOWNTOWN AND YOU
STILL NEED TO GO A LITTLE WAYS
YOU CAN HOP ON A BIKE OR HOP ON
A SCOOTER E BIKES ALSO
THEORETICALLY HAVE A LITTLE BIT
MORE RANGE THAN E SCOOTERS.
FOR THOSE OF YOU THAT HAVE
RIDDEN THE SCOOTER, YOU KNOW
YOU'RE IN AN UPRIGHT POSITION.
YOU FEEL ALL THE BUMPS ON THE
ROAD BECAUSE THERE'S NOT AS
MUCH CUSHION WHEREAS BIKE MANY
OF YOU MIGHT BE FAMILIAR WITH
WHAT THAT EXPERIENCE IS LIKE
AND THESE ARE ELECTRIC BIKES AS
WELL.
SO THE THOUGHT PROCESSES THAT
THAT FIRST LAST MILE CONNECTION
AND SOME OF THE OPPORTUNITIES
TO USE THIS FORM OF SHARED
MOBILITY MIGHT EITHER ATTRACT
NEW PEOPLE TO THE SYSTEM OR
ATTRACT PEOPLE TO IT INSTEAD
OF TAKING OTHER TYPES
OF TRANSPORTATION LIKE SINGLE
OCCUPANCY VEHICLES.
>> SO FOR THOSE REASONS AS
IDENTIFIED IN BOTH VISION ZERO
PLAN AS WELL AS THE
CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN ABOUT
REALLY GIVING PEOPLE THESE
TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS, WE'RE
STARTING WITH THE DEPLOYMENT
OF ONE HUNDRED E BIKES AND
REALLY SUCH A PROPOSAL BECAUSE
WE WANT TO SEE HOW WELL THE
SYSTEM WORKS.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
PARKING DOESN'T BECOME AN
ISSUE.
OBVIOUSLY THESE ARE BIGGER
VEHICLES SINCE THEY ARE NOT
DOCKED.
THEY ARE A SYSTEM WHICH JUST
LIKE BIKES YOU KIND OF RELEASE
YOUR RIDE WHEN YOU'RE DONE WITH
IT AND TO CHECK IT OUT AND
CHECK IT BACK IN KIND
OF WHEREVER WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT IT DOESN'T LEAD TO
OBSTRUCTIONS ON THE SIDEWALK OR
BLOCKING DOORWAYS AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO WE WANT TO KIND OF START OFF
WITH A SMALLER DEPLOYMENTS,
MAKE SURE THAT THAT LAUNCH IS
SUCCESSFUL AND THEN WE'LL BE
MONITORING THAT SPACE PRETTY
CLOSELY TO MAKE SURE THAT IF
THERE ARE CONCERNS THAT ARE
BEING RAISED THAT WE WORK WITH
SPENT TO ADDRESS THOSE AS
EFFECTIVELY AS POSSIBLE.
SO THE OTHER THING THAT I DID
WANT TO NOTE IS IN PART
OF THESE DISCUSSIONS WITH SPIN
MYSELF AND TREVOR O'BRIEN, ONE
OF OUR NEW TRANSPORTATION
PLANNERS, WE'RE REALLY ASKING
SPEN TO COME TO THE TABLE WITH
SOME ADDITIONAL EQUITY
CONSIDERATIONS FOR THEIR
EMPLOYMENT.
AND SO STARTING IN FEBRUARY
THEY ACTUALLY LAUNCHED A COUPLE
OF THINGS THAT APPLY NOW
INCLUDING TO SCOOTERS BUT THEN
WOULD APPLY TO THE BIKES AS
WELL.
THE FIRST IS THAT THEY HAVE A
SPIN ACCESS PROGRAM WHICH
ALLOWS FOR PEOPLE IN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING OR MODERATE MEANS TO BE
ABLE TO GET A REDUCED FEE ON
CHECKING OUT THOSE VEHICLES AND
SO THEY'VE REACHED OUT TO
SEVERAL OF THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING COMPLEXES IN TOWN TO
TRY TO ESTABLISH THOSE
RELATIONSHIPS ALREADY.
SO WE WERE HAPPY TO SEE.
THE OTHER THING IS THEY'RE
OFFERING US IN CASH CARD AND
THIS IS DIRECTLY OR TARGETED
FOR FOLKS WHO ARE MAYBE
UNBANKED OR PERHAPS WHO DON'T
HAVE SMARTPHONES.
SO THE IDEA IS THAT YOU CAN
UNLOCK A RIDE ON ONE OF THESE
VEHICLES WITH A KIND OF A SMART
CARD AS OPPOSED TO THROUGH YOUR
PHONE OR SWIPING CREDIT CARD.
SO AGAIN, WE'RE REALLY TRYING
TO BROADEN THE REACH OR AT
LEAST THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
EVERYONE IN THE COMMUNITY TO BE
ABLE TO USE THESE DEVICES AND
WE'VE BEEN SATISFIED AT LEAST
TO STAFF LEVEL IN TERMS
OF WHAT'S BEEN BROUGHT TO THE
TABLE THAT THEY'VE KIND
OF ADDED SOME OF THESE
CONSIDERATIONS IN THEIR
DEPLOYMENT.
SO THOSE ARE THE HIGHLIGHTS
THAT I WANTED TO ADDRESS HAPPY
TO ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS,
PETE?
>> I KNOW YOU HAD SOME THAT I
DON'T KNOW IF YOU WANT ME TO
BRING UP YOUR EMAIL IF YOU
WANTED TO BRING WAS UP BUT AND
I SEE OTHER HANDS ARE GOING UP
AS WELL.
SO I'LL LET YOU MODERATE THAT
AND THEN WE'LL TURN TAKE TURNS
AND GO THROUGH THE QUESTIONS
THAT MIGHT COME UP.
>> THANKS.
YEAH I SEE PEOPLE RAISING THEIR
HANDS.
THAT'S GREAT.
THANK YOU AND AW YEAH LET'S DO
THE RACISM THING OR RAISE YOUR
HAND TO JULIE YOUR FIRST.
>> HI IT'S REALLY EXCITING TO
SEE THE BIKES COMING BACK.
I'VE BEEN ANXIOUSLY WAITING FOR
THAT AND HAVING BIKES IS REALLY
GREAT TO QUESTIONS IS THE SORT
OF GEOGRAPHICAL RANGE IN WHICH
THESE BIKES ARE PERMITTED THE
SAME AS FOR THE SCOOTERS AND
SECOND OF IF THIS IS SUCCESSFUL
AND WE YOU KNOW, DOUBLE THE
NUMBER OF BIKES, TRIPLE THE
NUMBER OF BIKES EVENTUALLY WHAT
HAPPENS TO THAT 20 CENT PAYMENT
THAT THEY'RE PAYING PER VEHICLE
IS THAT GOING TO CHANGE TO THE
POINT WHERE WE'RE PAYING THEM?
>> WHAT'S HOW'S THAT GOING TO
WORK?
YEAH, I HAVE AN ANSWER FOR THE
FIRST ONE AND SPECULATION ON
THE SECOND.
SO THE YES, THE COVERAGE THE
GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF COVERAGE
WOULD BE THE SAME FOR BOTH THE
THE SCOOTERS AS WELL AS THE
BIKES.
WE DO HAVE SOME OPPORTUNITIES
TO REFINE THAT AGAIN IF WE SEE
ISSUES WITH DEPLOYMENTS THERE
ARE SOME THINGS THAT WE CAN DO
SO FOR EXAMPLE WE CAN USE A
TOOL CALLED GEO FENCING WHERE
IF THERE'S CERTAIN BEHAVIOR
THAT'S DISCOURAGED IN A CERTAIN
AREA YOU CAN KIND OF FENCE THAT
AREA OFF MAYBE NOT ENTIRELY BUT
YOU CAN KIND SPECIAL PARAMETERS
OR RESTRICTIONS OR SO THAT'S
ONE THING WE'LL BE LOOKING
CLOSELY AT IN TERMS OF IF WE
EVER EXPAND THE FLEET.
I THINK WE DON'T KNOW IF THAT
IS IN THE CARDS.
I WILL SAY THE PLAN DOES CALL
FOR A MORE ROBUST ROLLOUT.
I THINK IT CALLS FOR ACTUALLY
UPWARDS OF FIVE HUNDRED
SCOOTERS AND FIVE HUNDRED
BIKES.
WE LIKE TO KIND OF GRADUALLY
EASE OUR WAY INTO THIS TO TRY
TO FIND A GOOD BALANCE AND YOU
KNOW, MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
MEETING THE DESIRES OF THE
COMMUNITY FOR THESE FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION WITHOUT
HAVING TOO MANY ON THE STREETS.
SO WHETHER WE'RE GETTING IT
RIGHT OR NOT IS MAYBE UP FOR
DEBATE BUT AND ADMITTEDLY,
JULIE, WE HAVE NOT SPOKEN TO
SPAIN ABOUT WHAT THE FEE
STRUCTURE WOULD LOOK LIKE IF
THERE WAS AUGMENTATION OF MORE
BIKES.
>> I'M SURE THAT WOULD BE A
NEGOTIATION THAT WE WOULD HAVE
WHEN THAT TIME COMES IT DERMO.
SO I HAD QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
RANGE TOO AND WELL FIRST
OF ALL, THIS IS EXCITING.
HE SAID THE RANGE IS THE SAME
FOR SCOOTERS BUT I'M NOT REALLY
AWARE WHAT THE RANGES FOR THE
SCOOTER.
SO WHAT IS THE KIND
OF GEOGRAPHIC RANGE FOR USE SO
I DON'T KNOW THAT THERE ARE ANY
I'D HAVE TO DOUBLE CHECK.
I DON'T THINK THERE IS A OUTER
LIMIT BY WHICH YOU KNOW, THE
VEHICLES CAN'T BE USED.
I KNOW THERE HAVE BEEN STUDIES
FOR EXAMPLE BY THE WASHINGTON
AREA TRANSPORTATION STUDY ABOUT
A SORT OF SEAMLESS SYSTEM
BETWEEN US AND IPSI OR EASTERN
MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY FOR FOLKS
THAT WANT TO MAKE THOSE TRIPS.
I THINK THERE'S PROBABLY SOME
BATTERY RANGE LIMITATIONS SINCE
THESE ARE BATTERY ASSISTS THAT
YOU KNOW, EVENTUALLY THOSE
BATTERIES WILL WILL KIND OF RUN
OUT OF JUICE AND AND THEREFORE
WITH A BIKE AT LEAST YOU CAN
CONTINUE TO PEDAL WITH THE
SCOOTER.
>> WHAT YOU CAN DO IS KICK IT
THROUGH.
SO I ONLY KNOW RIGHT NOW THAT
THERE ARE SOME GEO FENCED AREAS
AROUND THE DIAG OR SCOOTER
USAGE.
BUT BEYOND THAT I DON'T THINK
THERE'S AN OUTER LIMIT TO HOW
FAR FOLKS CAN GO.
>> I CAN DOUBLE CHECK ON THAT
THOUGH.
>> OK, I GOT A COUPLE MORE
QUESTIONS.
IS THERE A WAY THAT WE CAN YOU
LIKE DO THEY GIVE US DATA SO
THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND PATTERNS
OF TRAVEL THAT MIGHT HELP US
REFINE SOME OF OUR NETWORK?
THEY DO, YEAH.
CURRENTLY IT'S WRITTEN INTO
THEIR AGREEMENT THAT THEY HAVE
TO SHARE DATA WITH US.
WE USE A THIRD PARTY VENDOR
WHILE THEY DO THAT THEY GIVE US
THE DATA THROUGH ITS POPULACE.
IT'S AGGREGATED SO WE DON'T SEE
ANY USER DETAILS OR PII OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
IT'S ALL AGGREGATED DATA AND SO
WHAT WE CAN DO IS TAKE AREAS
AND SHOW WHERE THE USAGE IS THE
STRONGEST, WHERE TRIPS ARE
ORIGINATING FROM, WHERE THEY'RE
ENDING AND SEE WHICH PATHS ARE
BEING TAKEN.
SO THAT IS PART OF IT.
>> ONE THING I WILL SAY IS THE
THE PLAN ACTUALLY OR I'M SORRY
THE AGREEMENT ACTUALLY SAYS
THAT WE CAN GET THEIR RAW DATA
FOR YOU.
IT'S NOT THE RIGHT THING TO
CALL IT BUT THE GBS FEED WHICH
AND FORGIVE ME I DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY WHAT THAT STANDS FOR.
I THINK IT'S LIKE THE SHARED BY
THE BUT THE AND THIS IS A
NATIONAL STANDARD FOR DATA FOR
THESE SHARED MICRO MOBILITY'S I
THINK WAS DEVELOPED IN L.A. I
REMEMBER CORRECTLY WE DON'T
HAVE THE ABILITY TO INGEST THAT
DATA KIND OF THE RAW DATA.
SO THAT'S WHY WE TAKE KIND
OF THE AGGREGATED DATA THROUGH
THIS THIRD PARTY POPULOUS.
>> SO THAT'S JUST TO SAY THAT
SOME OF OUR SOME OF OUR ABILITY
TO ANALYZE THE DATA IS
RESTRICTED BECAUSE IT'S ALREADY
SORT OF ANALYZED AND KIND
OF CLUSTERED FOR US.
>> BUT IF WE EVER HAD THE
ABILITY TO KIND OF ADJUST THE
DATA AND FURTHER REFINE IT, WE
COULD ASK FOR THAT IF NEED BE
OK AND IS THERE INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT WE SHOULD BE THINKING
ABOUT PROVIDING IN TERMS
OF JUST LIKE MORE RAX OR YOU
KNOW, I KNOW THAT THESE ARE
DARK LIST BUT JUST THINKING
ABOUT BEING ABLE TO PUT THEM IN
AN AREA THAT MAKES SENSE AND
STAYS OUT OF THERE RIGHT AWAY.
YEAH, THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
THINGS WE WANT TO REALLY
MONITOR CLOSELY WHEN IT COMES
TO THE EBIX.
>> YOU KNOW, FROM OUR
PERSPECTIVE WE PROBABLY CAN'T
FORCE THEM OUT OF THE RIGHT
OF WAY RIGHT.
WE CAN'T FORCE THEM ONTO
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
YOU'LL HEAR FROM ME LATER ON IS
WE ARE PILOTING A BIKE RACK
PROGRAM OUTSIDE OF DOWNTOWN.
SO DOWNTOWN HAS A PRETTY GOOD
CONCENTRATION OF BIKE RACKS.
BUT ONCE YOU GET OUTSIDE
OF DOWNTOWN THERE ARE LESS BIKE
RACKS AND THE BIKE RACKS THAT
DO EXIST ARE PROBABLY ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY
.
SO WE ARE LOOKING AT PILOT AND
I ACTUALLY HAVE THE TEAM DOING
RESEARCH ON DIFFERENT TYPES
OF BIKE RACKS RIGHT NOW AND WE
EVEN HAVE A BUSINESS THAT'S
VOLUNTEERED TO BE OUR GUINEA
PIG.
SO IT IS SOMETHING THAT WE ARE
LOOKING FOR AND I'LL GO INTO A
LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL ON THE
STAFF REPORT.
>> THANK.
ALL RIGHT, MOLLY.
THANKS.
I AM REALLY EXCITED ABOUT THIS
TO HAVE A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
SO THE FIRST IS ARE WE GOING TO
BE TRACKING USAGE OF THE YOU
MENTIONED THE SOME PROGRAMS TO
INCREASE EQUITABLE ACCESS TO
THE SYSTEM SO THE REDUCED FARES
AND THE CARDS ARE WE CAN
ACTUALLY HOW ARE WE GOING TO
TRACK THAT THOSE ARE GETTING
USED AND IF THEY'RE NOT GETTING
USED OR LIKE WHAT ARE WE GOING
TO DO TO TRY AND CREATE
PROGRAMS THAT ACTUALLY MEET THE
NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE WE'RE
TRYING TO HELP?
YEAH, GREAT QUESTION, MOLLY AND
ADMITTEDLY I HAVEN'T ASKED THAT
OF SPAIN BUT I'LL DO THAT IN MY
NEXT CHECK AND I HAVE TO CHECK
IN WITH THEM EVERY TWO WEEKS SO
I WILL GO AHEAD AND SEE IF THEY
HAVE A WAY THAT THEY CAN KIND
OF AGGREGATE THAT DATA AND GET
THAT OVER TO US IN TERMS OF HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE USING THE THE
CASH CARD AND HOW MANY PEOPLE
ARE USING THE REDUCED FARE THAT
WOULD BE REALLY GOOD TO KNOW
THAT QUESTION.
>> AND THEN MY OTHER QUESTION
IS ABOUT THERE WERE SOME ISSUES
FOR A WHILE WITH SCOOTERS BEING
FULLY GEOPHONES OUT OF THE
CAMPUS AREA AND THEN LOTS
OF SCOOTERS BEING SORT DUMPED
AROUND THE PERIMETER OF OF
WHERE THOSE BOUNDARIES WERE.
I'M WONDERING IT SEEMS LIKE
THAT HAS RESOLVED LIKE THERE'S
SCOOTERS ON CAMPUS AGAIN BUT
I'M CURIOUS ABOUT THAT A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT THAT CAMPUS
SCOOTER BIKE INTERFACE AND HOW
THAT'S GOING TO BE MANAGED
BECAUSE BIKES ARE SO MUCH
BIGGER.
>> YEAH, YEAH, THAT'S A GOOD
QUESTION.
THERE WAS A KIND OF TECHNICAL
SNAFU OR GLITCH THAT HAPPENED
OR MISCOMMUNICATION.
SO YEAH, WHAT MOLLY SPEAKING TO
IS WHAT WAS THAT ALL ABOUT A
YEAR AND A HALF OR SO AGO,
MAYBE TWO YEARS THERE WAS A GEO
FENCED AREA THAT EXTENDED NOT
ONLY ON CAMPUS BUT PARTS
OF DOWNTOWN IF I REMEMBER
CORRECTLY AND I THINK IT WAS IT
WAS A MISTAKE.
THAS SOME DIRECTION I
THINK THAT WAS PROVIDED BY THE
UNIVERSITY THAT WAS
MISUNDERSTOOD AND SO THAT'S
WHAT HAPPENED.
AND AS SOON AS WE UNDERSTOOD WE
WERE GETTING A LOT
OF COMPLAINTS OR CONCERNS OR
ISSUES ABOUT THAT.
SO WE FOLLOWED UP WITH SPIN AND
IT WAS ADDRESSED AS SOON AS WE
UNDERSTOOD WHAT WAS GOING.
WHAT'S INTERESTING ABOUT THESE
ARRANGEMENTS IS OR THE E
SCOOTER DEPLOYMENT WHILE FOUR
HUNDRED ARE PERMITTED WITHIN
THE COMMUNITY.
TWO HUNDRED PERMITTED BY THE
CITY AND THE OTHER TWO HUNDRED
ARE PERMITTED BY THE UNIVERSITY
BECAUSE WE PRETTY MUCH HAVE AN
ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT THESE
SCHOOLS ARE GOING TO END UP ON
CAMPUS AND THERE ARE OTHER
SCHOOLS THAT ARE GOING TO END
UP FROM CAMPUS TO DOWNTOWN AND
PARTS OF TOWN.
SO WE FELT LIKE THE BEST WAY TO
DO THAT IS TO JUST KIND OF KNOW
THE THE THE AGREEMENT AND HAVE
RIGHT NOW WITH THE BIKES THOSE
ARE THAT IS EXCLUSIVELY WITH
US.
BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS THE
UNIVERSITY IS IN SIMILAR
CONVERSATIONS WITH SPEND NOW
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT AN
ADDITIONAL HUNDRED ARE IMMINENT
AT THE UNIVERSITY.
I THINK I HAVE A GOOD WORKING
RELATIONSHIP WITH MY
COUNTERPART AT THE UNIVERSITY,
STEVE DOLEN AND SO I'LL BE
SHARING OUR EXPERIENCE WITH HIM
AND THEN HE'LL PROBABLY BE
MAKING SOME DECISIONS ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, IF THEY'RE GOING TO
LOOK FOR ANY ADDITIONAL
DEPLOYMENT ON CAMPUS IN TERMS
OF THE GEO FENCING THAT HAPPENS
ON CAMPUS, WE DEFER TO THE
UNIVERSITY SO IF THEY WANT TO
GO FENCE THE DIAG THAT'S KIND
OF THEIR PREROGATIVE AND THEIR
AGREEMENTS WITH SPEN.
SO I KNOW THE UNIVERSITY TRIES
TO REALLY ENCOURAGE THE PARKING
OF THE VEHICLES.
YOU KNOW A LOT OF THE CAMPUS
BUILDINGS HAVE RACKS IN FRONT
OF EVERY BUILDING AND IN FRONT
OF EVERY DOOR SO THEY REALLY
TRY TO PUSH THAT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE SCOOTERS AND THE BIKES
WILL END UP ON THE RACKS AS
OPPOSED TO CHAIN TO HANDRAILS
OR THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO OR THEY'RE NOT EVEN CHAINED
RIGHT.
SO SO YEAH, A LOT OF THE STUFF
RELATED TO CAMPUS ISGE THAT
WE HAVE TO DEFER THAT TO THE
UNIVERSITY ITSELF.
ALL RIGHT, PETER, THANKS.
UM, MY QUESTION WAS JUST ABOUT
HOW ARE WE DOING WITH SCOOTERS
AND KEEPING THEM OUT OF THE
SIDEWALKS AND KEEPING WHERE
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO TRIPLE ROOM
AND BE BLOCKED BY THEM SINCE A
BIKE IN THAT SITUATION IS EVEN
WORSE.
SO ARE WE DOING WELL THE
SCOOTERS AND CAN WE EXPECT TO
DO OUR BIKES?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION AND THANKS FOR RAISING
IT BECAUSE IT IS SOMETHING THAT
AS YOU MAY RECALL THERE WAS A
DIFFERENT PROVIDER THAT FIRST
CAME TO THE COMMUNITY BACK IN
TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND THAT
DEPLOYMENT WAS DID EXPERIENCE A
LOT OF COMPLAINTS ABOUT KIND
OF INAPPROPRIATE PARKING.
>> PART OF THE REASON WHY WE
DIDN'T ADD A LITTLE BIT MORE
SUCCESS WITH SPIN IS THAT THEIR
OPERATIONAL MODELS A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
THE PREVIOUS PROVIDER WAS A
CROWDSOURCED SYSTEM WHERE ANY
USER COULD SIGN UP TO BE A PART
OF THE SYSTEM AND THEN THEY
COULD TAKE THE SCOOTER HOME AND
CHARGE IT AND THEN REDEPLOY THE
NEXT MORNING AND THEY WOULD GET
A BONUS.
>> BUT THERE WERE NO LOCAL
STAFF MEMBERS FROM THAT COMPANY
WITHIN THE COMMUNITY.
SO IF THERE WERE COMPLAINTS
THERE WAS NO ONE REALLY TO HELP
ADDRESS THOSE COMPLAINTS, SPIN
DOES HAVE STAFF IN THE
COMMUNITY SO WHEN THERE IS A
COMPLAINT THAT'S RAISED THEY GO
OUT IN RELATIVELY SHORT ORDER.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, I HEARD
TODAY FROM THEM THAT THEY'RE
TWO HOURS THEY TRY TO ADDRESS
ANY COMPLAINT WITHIN TWO HOURS.
I ALSO ASKED OUR I.T.
DEPARTMENT TO QUERY OUR WAY TO
FIX IT.
WE DO HAVE A CATEGORY ON THE
APP OR WHAT WE CALL ABANDONED
SCOOTERS AND IN THE LAST THREE
HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIVE DAYS
THERE WERE FORTY TWO COMPLAINTS
THAT WERE LODGED ABOUT
INAPPROPRIATELY PARKED
SCOOTERS.
BUT TWENTY SIX OF THOSE WERE
ALREADY ADDRESSED BY THE TIME
THE SPIN OR THE COMMUNITY
STANDARDS OFFICER SHOWED UP.
SO ONLY SIXTEEN OF THOSE FORTY
TWO REALLY REQUIRED CORRECTIVE
ACTION.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT'S
INTERESTING BOTH PRESENTS A
LITTLE BIT OF A CHALLENGE BUT
THEN ALSO KIND OF PROVIDES SORT
OF RECTIFYING OPPORTUNITY IS
SINCE THESE ARE SHARED DISKLESS
SYSTEMS OFTENTIMES WHAT HAPPENS
IF SOMEONE DOES INAPPROPRIATELY
LEAVE A SCOOTER OR BIKE WHERE
MAYBE IT SHOULDN'T BE SOMEONE
ELSE MAY COME BY PRETTY QUICKLY
TO CHECK IT OUT AND THEN THE
ISSUE MIGHT RESOLVE ITSELF.
THAT'S NOT TO SUGGEST THAT
THAT'S GOOD THAT THE PERSON WHO
RELEASED IT IN THE FIRST PLACE
SHOULD HAVE DONE SO PROPERLY.
BUT AS YOU CAN SEE OUT OF THE
FORTY TWO THE VAST MAJORITY
OF THOSE TWENTY SIX BY THE TIME
WE SHOWED UP THE ISSUE HAD
ALREADY BEEN RESOLVED.
SO YOU KNOW WHETHER THAT'S TOO
MANY TOO LITTLE I I THINK EACH
ONE OF US MIGHT HAVE AN OPINION
OR A JUDGMENT ON THAT BUT FORTY
TWO OVER THE LAST THREE HUNDRED
SIXTY FIVE DAYS AND SIXTEEN
OF WHICH REQUIRED CORRECTIVE
ACTIONS IS THE NUMBER THAT
WE'VE EXPERIENCED AND I THINK I
SAW IN THE DESCRIPTION THAT
THESE HAVE THE TYPE OF STAND
THAT THE UP VERTICALLY IT'S NOT
A LEANING KICKSTAND WHICH WOULD,
TAKING UP LESS SPACE AND LESS
PROPENSITY TO FALL OVER.
JULIE HAD A QUESTION IN THE
CHAT RIGHT.
JULIE ASKING IF THESE BIKES
WOULD FIT INTO OUR BIKE RACKS.
NOT SURE THAT'S SOMETHING YOU
KNOW OFF HAND.
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION.
IT PROBABLY DEPENDS.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF BIKE RACKS OUT THERE.
SO IF IT'S LIKE THE DAY WHEN I
THINK ABOUT THE BIKE CORRALS
THAT DENHA HAS DEPLOYED, I
WOULDN'T ANY REASON WHY THIS
WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO LEAN UP
AGAINST THAT OR IF YOU HAVE ANY
OF THE TRADITIONAL LIKE YOU
SHAPED BIKE RACKS, THERE'S NO
REASON WHY YOU LEAN THE BIKE UP
AGAINST THAT OR USE THE
KICKSTAND YOU KNOW, A POSTER
RACK IF YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH
THOSE WHERE YOU JUST KIND
OF PUT YOUR FRONT WHEEL IN
LOOKS LIKE THE WAY YOU SLIDE
PIECES OF TOAST THEN THERE'S NO
REASON WHY YOU WOULD FIT THAT.
I DON'T KNOW IF LIKE A BIKE
LOCKER OR A HIGHER GRADE
FACILITY WITH THE BASKET, THE
HANDLEBARS, THINGS LIKE THAT, I
DON'T KNOW HOW WELL THOSE WOULD
FIT IN.
SO I THINK IT PROBABLY JUST
DEPENDS ON SORT OF BIKE RACK
THAT YOU HAVE IN MIND.
BUT AS BRETT SAID TO MEANWHILE
WE WILL DEFINITELY ENCOURAGE
FOLKS TO PARK, YOU KNOW, IN
BIKE RACKS OR ADJACENT TO BIKE
RACKS.
YOU KNOW, THE NEED TO PULL INTO
THAT BIKE RACK AS LONG AS
YOU'RE ADJACENT TO IT.
>> IT DOES HAVE THE THE
KICKSTAND OF A DOUBLE FEATURE
KICKSTAND THAT'LL KEEP THE BIKE
UPRIGHT.
>> SO ALL RIGHT.
ARE THESE EXPECTED TO BE
DEPLOYED YEAR ROUND?
>> YES.
WELL, THAT THAT IS THE HOPE I
THINK FOR SPIN THEY HAVE THE
SCOOTERS HAVE BEEN AROUND YEAR
ROUND NOW.
>> I THINK THE FIRST YEAR THAT
THEY WERE HERE MAYBE THEY WERE
PULLED BACK AT LEAST IN
QUANTITY IN THE WINTER TIME.
BUT THEY ARE SEEING USAGE YEAR
ROUND AND I THINK WITH THE
BIKES I WOULD WOULDN'T BE
SURPRISED IF THE INTENT IS FOR
SPIN TO OPERATE THOSE YEAR
ROUND AS WELL.
>> SO THE QUESTION WHAT DOES IT
REALLY MEAN FOR A VEHICLE TO BE
MANAGED AND LICENSED BY EITHER
THE CITY OR THE UNIVERSITY DOES
IMPACT WHO GETS THE TWENTY
CENTS OR CURRENTLY ONE DOLLAR
PER VEHICLE OR WHAT DOES IT
REALLY MEAN BECAUSE THE
VEHICLES OBVIOUSLY TRAVERSE
BOTH OF THOSE GEOGRAPHIC AREAS
?
>> YEAH, IT'S LARGELY THAT FEE
WHEN WHEN I SAY FOUR HUNDRED
SCXAMPLE ARE
PERMITTED TO OPERATE WITHIN THE
CITY.
THAT'S KIND OF THE AGREED UPON
MAX THAT WE HAVE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY AND THE CITY.
>> BUT THEN WE GET A FEE FOR
TWO HUNDRED OF THEM AND THEN
THE UNIVERSITY GETS THE FEE FOR
THE OTHER TWO HUNDRED AND THE
UNIVERSITY HAS ITS OWN SEPARATE
AGREEMENT WITH SPIN.
BUT YEAH SO THE THE BIKES THAT
WE'RE GETTING IS KIND OF COMING
OUT OF OUR
ALLOTMENT
OF SCOOTERS AND THEN AGAIN IF
THE UNIVERSITY DECIDES FOR THAT
THEN I'M SURE THEY'LL NEGOTIATE
A RATE RELATED THEIR SCOOTERS
AS WELL.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
AND THE OTHER QUESTION IS SO
SPIN HAS TO HAVE AN EXCLUSIVE
AGREEMENT WITH THE CITY I
ASSUME, RIGHT?
NO NO OTHER COMPANIES CAN WE
CAN'T AGREE WITH OTHER
COMPANIES TO PROVIDE THE
SERVICE.
>> NOT EXACTLY THE WAY IT'S
STRUCTURED NOW IS WE HAVE THIS
THE ATTACHMENT THAT YOU SAW IN
THE PACKET IS A A RIGHT AWAY
LICENSE AGREEMENT THAT HAS TO
BE APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
SO WE HAVE BEEN APPROACHED BY
SEVERAL OTHER PROVIDERS OF BOTH
SCOOTERS AND BIKES AND WHAT
WE'VE PRETTY MUCH SAID IS WE'RE
LOOKING FOR SOMETHING NEW.
SO WE WE HAVE SCOOTERS.
WE'RE NOT LOOKING FOR A BUNCH
OF DIFFERENT SCOOTER PROVIDERS
THAT MAY BE STAFF'S
RECOMMENDATION, BUT IF IF A
PROVIDER REALLY WANTED TO FORCE
THE ISSUE THEY COULD HAVE US
BRING SOMETHING TO CITY
COUNCIL.
BUT IT IS NOT EXCLUSIVE IN
NAME.
IT'S IT'S JUST THAT IT HAS TO
BE APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL
PURSUANT TO OUR ORDINANCE LIKE
OUR MICRO MOBILITY ORDINANCE
THAT WE IT OK, WELL I FOR ONE
THINK IT'S VERY EXCITING.
I LOVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE
SEX OR ANY BIKES AVAILABLE FOR
PEOPLE THAT CAN AFFORD TO
PURCHASE ONE IN THE CITY.
I HOPE THAT GOES WELL AND WE
GET MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED
EVENTUALLY.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS FROM ANYONE?
>> OK, IF THAT'S IF THAT'S ALL
THEN SO IS THERE A MOTION TO
RECOMMEND APPROVAL OF THE
AMENDMENT TO SPIN'S AGREEMENT
TO INCLUDE E BICYCLE'S I MOLLY
SECONDED BY JULIE SO ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE
RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY YES AND
ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE SAY NO
RAISE YOUR HAND OK THE MOTION
PASSES THEM ALL RIGHT SO THAT
WILL BE SENT TO COUNCIL RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
SO NEXT INCLUDED IN THE PACKET
ARE TWO DRAFT LETTERS RELATED
TO CONGRESSIONAL FUNDING
REQUESTS.
ONE IS RELATED TO PEDESTRIAN
SIGNALS AND THE OTHER IS
RELATED TO THE NARBOROUGH TRAIN
STATION.
AND SO RAYMONDE, IF YOU COULD
PLEASE TALK ABOUT WHAT THESE
REQUESTS ARE AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS AND THEN AFTER THAT
WE'LL AGAIN HAVE A MOTION ON
THESE.
>> YEAH, THANKS.
SO THE CITY AS WELL AS A LOT
OF OTHER COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ARE GEARING UP FOR
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED
FUNDING AND SO EVERYBODY IS
KIND OF PUTTING TOGETHER A LIST
OF REQUESTS AND SO THE CITY IS
PUTTING TOGETHER A TOTAL OF I
THINK FIVE REQUESTS, TWO
OF WHICH RELATED TO
TRANSPORTATION ARE AS BRETT
DESCRIBED PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AS
WELL AS THE TRAIN STATION.
SO IN A LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL,
THE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS PROJECT
IS ESTIMATED AT TWO POINT ONE
FIVE MILLION DOLLARS THAT WOULD
GO TOWARDS A SIGNAL TIMING
EVALUATION.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
PROVIDING ADEQUATE CROSSING
TIME FOR PEDESTRIANS TO GO IN
ALL DIRECTIONS WHILE WE DO HAVE
THE CAPABILITY TO DO THAT
IN-HOUSE.
IT'S A FAIRLY LABOR INTENSIVE
EXERCISE.
SO WE WANT TO JUST BE ABL
KNOCK OUT THE WHOLE SYSTEM ONCE
AND HAVE SOMEONE HELP US WITH
THAT.
>> THE OTHER THING THAT WE WANT
TO DO IS WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT ALL OF OUR SIGNALS HAVE
COME DOWN PEDESTRIAN TIMERS OR
THE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL AS A
COUNTDOWN.
WE'VE BEEN SLOWLY AND SURELY
KIND OF UPGRADING THESE.
THESE ARE IMPROVING
COUNTERMEASURE.
>> WE JUST RECENTLY GOT A SMALL
GRANT FOR HIGHWAY SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM FUNDS FOR
THAT.
BUT WE JUST WANT TO KIND OF GET
ALL OF OUR SIGNALS UP TO THAT
STANDARD, MAKE SURE THAT
THEY'RE ALL EQUIPPED WITH THAT
.
>> THE OTHER THING THAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS MAKE SURE THAT
AS MANY OF OUR SIGNALS ARE
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS
AS POSSIBLE.
YOU'VE HEARD US TALK A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT THIS IN THE PAST APPS
THIS IS WHEN PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS
WILL HAVE AN AUDIBLE FEATURE
THAT MAKES THEM EASIER TO
LOCATE WITH PERSONS WITH VISUAL
IMPAIRMENTS.
SO I HAVE A HOMING DEVICE AND
THEN WHEN YOU PUSH THE BUTTON
IT WILL DENOTE THAT IT'S IN THE
CROSSWALK SIGN TURNS ON TO BE
ABLE TO CROSS NOT TOO
DISSIMILAR IF YOU'VE EVER USED
ONE OF OUR RECTANGULAR RAPID
FLASHING BEACON SIGNS YELLOW
FLASHING SIGNS THERE'S A LITTLE
PING THAT YOU HEAR AND THEN
WHEN YOU PUSH THE BUTTON
THERE'S A MESSAGE THAT COMES ON
I THINK THAT SAYS YELLOW LIGHTS
ARE FLASHING.
SO WHILE WITH THIS REQUEST WE
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO UPGRADE
EVERY SINGLE SIGNAL TO APPS.
WE WANT TO TRY TO GET A HEAD
START AND DO AS MANY OF THEM AS
POSSIBLE WITH THE FUNDING THAT
MIGHT COME TO US.
SO THAT'S WHAT THE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL UPGRADE PROJECT IS.
>> AND THEN MOVING ON STAY IN
OUR STATION.
THE REQUEST IS FOR ONE POINT
FIVE MILLION DOLLARS.
I THINK YOU'VE HEARD US REPORT
IN THE PAST THAT THE STATION IS
STUCK AT THE MOMENT WE HAD DONE
AN ENVIRONMENTALIST ASSESSMENT
THAT WAS PRESENTED TO THE
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
AND THE FEDERAL RAILROAD
ADMINISTRATION SUSPENDED THEIR
REVIEW OF THAT.
THAT WAS ABOUT A YEAR AGO.
SINCE THEN WE'VE BEEN IN A
WHOLE SERIES OF DISCUSSIONS
WITH AMTRAK, A RAILROAD
ADMINISTRATION WITH DIFFERENT
FOLKS IN THE COMMUNITY, WITH
DEVELOPERS, WITH ALL KINDS
OF FOLKS JUST WITH MICHIGAN
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHAT OUR
NEXT STEPS ARE.
AND SO IN ORDER TO REALLY KIND
OF TAKE A GOOD NEXT STEP
FORWARD AGAIN WE NEED SOME
INFUSION OF DOLLARS RAIL
STATION PLANNING IS A VERY
SPECIALIZED THING THAT NO ONE
ON OUR TEAM HAS THE CAPACITY TO
BE ABLE TO DO.
AND SO YOU KNOW, IT'S AMAZING
ALL THE LITTLE DETAILS THAT YOU
NEED TO KNOW ABOUT LIKE
PLATFORMS AND HOW CLOSE THEY
CAN BE TO THE RAIL AND SO FORTH
AND THE HYPE AND ALL THOSE SORT
OF THINGS.
SO THE IDEA IS TO ASK FOR THIS
ONE POINT FIVE MILLION DOLLARS
TO ASSIST WITH THE ENGINEERING
DESIGN, PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND
SITING DISCUSSIONS FOR THE
FUTURE IN OUR TRAIN STATION.
I THINK YOU'VE HEARD US REPORT
IN THE PAST THAT THE TRAIN
STATION IS THE HEAVIEST USE
TRAIN STATION IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN WITH MORE BOARDINGS
AND A LIGHTINGS THAN ANY OTHER
TRAIN STATION IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
YET IT IS THE SMALLEST TRAIN
STATION IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
SO THE DEMAND DEFINITELY SEEMS
TO BE THERE.
WE EXPECT DEMAND TO GROW AND SO
TRYING TO BUILD A STATION THAT
WILL MEET NOT JUST TODAY'S
NEEDS BUT FUTURE NEEDS ARE WHAT
THE IDEA IS FOR BEHIND THIS
CONGRESSIONAL REQUEST.
SO AND THEN JUST THE STRUCTURE
OF WHAT YOU HAVE IN YOUR
PACKAGE.
THERE ARE TWO DRAFT LETTERS.
YOU KNOW, THEY ARE JUST KIND
OF GENERAL LETTERS OF SUPPORT.
THEY DON'T HAVE A LOT OF DETAIL
REALLY IN THE APPLICATION.
BUT THE IDEA IS THAT THE
LETTERS THERE WOULD BE A
SEPARATE LETTER SENT TO EACH
OF THE CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATES
.
SO THIS IS CONGRESSWOMAN
DINGELL.
SENATOR STABENOW, SENATOR
PETERS AND THEN THAT WOULD JUST
BE A COMPLEMENT TO THE PETITION
THAT'S GOING IN.
I WENT WITH LETTERS OF SUPPORT
AS OPPOSED TO A RESOLUTION
BECAUSE LETTERS OF SUPPORT SEEM
TO BE THE THE PREFERRED
METHODOLOGY.
IT'S JUST A LITTLE BIT I THINK
EASIER TO TRACK.
AND SO WHAT WE'RE ASKING FOR
TONIGHT IS IF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SUPPORTS THESE SUBMITTALS TO
ALLOW BRANT AS CHAIR TO SIGN
THOSE LETTERS OF ENDORSEMENT IN
THE PAST THE TIMING HASN'T
ALWAYS WORKED OUT WHERE WE
HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO ASK THIS
COMMISSION FOR ENDORSEMENT.
BUT IN THIS INSTANCE THE TIMING
THESE ARE DUE THIS WEEK, MAYBE
NEXT WEEK AND SO THERE'S AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO ACTUALLY
GET AN OFFICIAL STATEMENT FROM
THE COMMISSION AS A WHOLE THAT
CAN BE SIGNED OFF BY BRETT.
>> SO I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN
ANY QUESTIONS YOU MIGHT HAVE
DERMO.
YEAH, SPEAKING TO THE TRAIN
STATION FOR ONE TO BE CLEAR
THIS IS ABOUT CREATING A NEW
PLAN, NOT ABOUT KIND
OF REVIVING THE OLD ONE BUT I
UNDERSTAND WAS THE STICKING
POINT OR I DON'T REMEMBER THE
BODY REDUCE THAT.
>> BUT YEAH, FEDERAL RAILROAD
ADMINISTRATION YEAH.
SO YEAH I THINK BECAUSE WE HAVE
A BIT OF A BRICK WALL WITH WHAT
WE CALL THE FULLER SITE WHICH
IS AT THE BASE OF THE HOSPITAL,
I THINK WE'RE KIND OF WANTING
TO GO BACK TO THE DRAWING
BOARD.
>> WE ASSESS THE SITES NOW I
DON'T KNOW IF THAT SITE IS OFF
THE TABLE ENTIRELY OR IF WE
NEED TO RETHINK HOW IT WAS
POSITION.
BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT IF
THAT SITE IS CONSIDERED, THERE
ARE OTHER SITES THAT ARE
CONSIDERED AS WELL THAT WE ARE
NOT GOING TO PUT ALL OUR EGGS
IN THAT BASKET THAT THEY'RE YOU
KNOW, WE'LL GO BACK TO LOOK AT
OTHER SITES THAT WERE LOOKED AT
PREVIOUSLY AND MAYBE SEE IF
THEY'RE NEW ONES THAT PRESENT
THEMSELVES TO JUST IN ORDER TO
GET STARTED.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S JUST MY MUTE BUTTON ON
MUTE BUTTON RATHER OTHER
QUESTIONS MOLLY, DO WE HAVE A
SENSE OF HOW LIKELY IS FUNDING
REQUESTS TO BE FULFILLED AND DO
WE HAVE SORT OF LIKE IF WE
DON'T GET THEM IS THERE SORT WE
KNOW WHAT'S THE NEXT AND THE
NEXT THE NEXT WHAT WE'RE GOING
TO TRY AND GET FUNDING IS IT'S
SORT OF LIKE WE'RE GOING TO TRY
FOR THIS AND IF WE DON'T GET IT
WE'RE MOVING ON OR DOING
SOMETHING ELSE.
I PROBABLY DON'T HAVE A
SCIENTIFIC ANSWER ABOUT THE
PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS BUT IF I
HAD TO GUESS IT'S PROBABLY SLIM
JUST BASED ON THE NATURE
OF CONGRESSIONAL EARMARKS OR
SORRY CONGRESSIONALLY
DIRECTED
FUNDING A LOT OF COMMUNITIES
ARE POSITIONING FOR THESE
REQUESTS AND THE DOLLARS ARE
FINITE.
SO I I DON'T KNOW HOW GOOD OUR
ODDS ARE BUT IT'S IT'S A TOUGH
IT'S A TOUGH GAME TO TO TRY TO
TO PLAY SO BUT WE ALSO YOU
KNOW, THE CITY IS COMMITTED TO
TRY TO LEVERAGE AS MANY FEDERAL
AND STATE DOLLARS AS POSSIBLE
TO STRETCH OUR LOCAL DOLLARS AS
FAR AS POSSIBLE.
SO YOU WON'T KNOW UNLESS YOU
TRY AND I THINK MILTON THE
HONY, OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR
AND RON FOURNIER ARE VERY MUCH
COMMITTED TO TRYING TO BRING IN
EXTERNAL RESOURCES TO HELP
ADVANCE SOME OF OUR KEY
INFRASTRUCTURE AGENDA ITEMS.
AND THEN IN TERMS OF IF WE
DON'T GET THIS FUNDING, I THINK
THEY'RE STILL ON THE TABLE.
WE'LL JUST ALWAYS LOOK FOR
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES THEY THEY
MIGHT BE THROUGH SORT OF THESE
CONGRESSIONALLY DIRECTED
PROGRAMS OR THERE ARE
DISCRETIONARY GRANTS LIKE
STREETS FOR ALL WHICH WE JUST
GOT WE HAD PREVIOUSLY APPLIED
FOR A GRANT ADMINISTERED BY
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
CALLED KRISSIE DON'T ASK ME
WHAT STANDS FOR IT CRISI IT HAS
TO DO WITH RAIL STATION
PLANNING AND SO WE COULD ALWAYS
TRY TO PURSUE SOME OF THOSE
SORT OF COMPETITIVE GRANT
APPLICATIONS TOO.
AND THEN THERE MAY STATE LOTS
OF FUNDING WE CAN TRY TO
PURSUE.
>> SO EVEN IF WE DON'T GET THE
FUNDING I DOUBT WE'LL GIVE UP
ON THESE INITIATIVES.
IT'S JUST ABOUT TRYING TO FIND
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR FUNDING
AS THEY PRESENT THEMSELVES.
THANKS.
>> THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS I BELIEVE MY
HAND IS UP.
GO AHEAD.
SORRY.
>> SO THE THE THE WHAT WE'RE
ASKING FOR WE'RE ASKING FOR ONE
POINT FIVE MILLION AND IS THAT
SUPPOSED TO COVER BOTH THE AP
PROJECT AND THE TRAIN STATION
PROJECT?
>> A GOOD CLARIFYING QUESTION
THERE ACTUALLY TO SEPARATE
REQUESTS FOR TWO SEPARATE
AMOUNTS THE THE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL PROJECT AND APS PROJECT
IS FOR TWO POINT ONE FIVE
MILLION AND THEN THE ANN ARBOR
STATION IS A SEPARATE REQUEST
FOR ONE POINT FIVE MILLION.
>> SO IN TOTAL REQUEST IT'S
THREE POINT SIX OR YES SIX FIVE
BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY I LOVE THE AP
ASPART BUT I TELL FOR BOTH BUT
NOT IT'S GOOD SAY THANKS LARRY.
>> THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
REMEMBER ANYTHING ELSE YOU
WANTED TO ADD?
>> I DON'T SEE ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
SO IS THERE A MOTION TO ALLOW
ME AS CHAIR TO ENDORSE THE
LETTERS AND SUPPORT FOR THE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL UPGRADE
PROJECT IN THE NARBERTH STATION
PROJECT?
IT CAN ONLY BE TAKEN AS A OK.
WE CAN TRY A SINGLE ACTION TO
COVER BOTH LETTERS FIRST SO
DHARMA THAT WAS THE MOTION AND
MAKING THAT A SECOND.
HOW IS THAT FOR BOTH LETTERS OR
DO WE WANT TO SPLIT THEM INTO
TWO IF WE'RE OK AND ARE THE
MOTION OURS IS THAT OK?
>> I'M FINE WITH BOTH YEAH.
ALL RIGHT I'M FINE.
SO ARE THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY RAISE YOUR
HAND OR SAY US THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO.
RAISE YOUR HAND.
OK, IT LOOKS LIKE THE MOTION
PASSES.
SO RAYMOND YEAH.
IF YOU'LL JUST SEND ME THOSE
AND SIGN THEM AND GET THEM BACK
TO YOU AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
WE'LL DO IT.
THANKS.
OK, INFORMATION AND DISCUSSIONS
SECTION OF THE AGENDA.
SO THE FIRST TOPIC IN THIS
SECTION WAS THE RESURFACING AND
RELATED PROJECTS UPDATE FROM
JANE BUT RAYMOND.
>> YEAH YEAH YEAH.
>> SORRY EVERYBODY.
I REGRET TO INFORM YOU THAT I
JUST FOUND OUT THAT JANE ALLEN
WILL BE ABLE TO JOIN US TO GIVE
THAT PRESENTATION THIS EVENING.
SO WE'LL JUST HAVE POSTPONE
THIS TILL NEXT MONTH.
THIS ISN'T TYPICALLY AN ACTION.
I AM SO THAT'S MAYBE NOT
TERRIBLY PROBLEMATIC BUT YEAH,
I JUST DIDN'T COME TOGETHER FOR
TONIGHT SO APOLOGIES ON THAT
BUT WE'LL DEFINITELY MAKE SURE
TO HAVE THIS FRONT AND CENTER
FOR YOU NEXT MONTH.
OK, THANK YOU.
SO THE NEXT UPTURN IS THE
CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES
HELP.
OK SO ARE WE ARE WE JOINED BY
CYNTHIA?
>> WE ARE TO GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THE CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS YOU MAY FREEMAN
CYNTHIA YEAH.
>> SO CINDY DID JOIN US THIS
EVENING.
NOW ADMITTEDLY I DO WANT THANKS
INDEED FOR JOINING US BECAUSE
SHE JUST GOT OUT OF A TRAFFIC
MEETING MOMENTS AGO SO SHE'S
KIND OF BACK TO BACK TONIGHT.
SO CYNTHIA, IF YOU NEED A
MINUTE, LET US KNOW.
WE DO HAVE NICK ALSO GIVING A
PRESENTATION.
SO IF YOU NEED TO SWITCH THAT
AROUND, LET US KNOW WHEN WE CAN
PROPOSE THAT TO BRETT.
>> BUT IF YOU'RE GOOD TO GO, I
THINK YOU SHOULD HAVE
COMBUSTIBILITY TO SHARE YOUR
SCREEN.
>> YEAH, I'M HERE.
I JUST I JUST GOT PROMOTED SO I
GIVE ME JUST A QUICK MOMENT,
GET ALL MY STUFF TOGETHER AND
I'M READY TO GO.
WE HAD A A GREAT TRAFFIC COMING
MEETING EARLIER.
I JUST NEED TO TURN MY BACK ON
EVERYONE AND LET ME SHARE MY
SCREEN HERE.
MY PRESENTATION AND IF YOU
CANNOT CONFIRM THAT THAT IS
COMING THROUGH, THAT'S IT.
>> ALL RIGHT, GREAT.
WELL, THANK YOU TO THE CHAIR
FOR INVITING ME TO BE HERE THIS
EVENING TO TALK ABOUT OUR
CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES.
>> IT WAS ME AND I WERE
DISCUSSING AS WE WERE GETTING
READY FOR THIS PRESS
PRESENTATION THAT IT ACTUALLY
IT'S BEEN A WHILE SINCE WE
PRESENTED TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ON THE CROSSWALK
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND THAT A
LOT OF THE CURRENT MEMBERS
OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION WERE NOT MEMBERS AT
THAT TIME AND WE WANTED TO
BRING EVERYBODY UP TO SPEED AND
I KNOW THAT THERE ARE SOME
QUESTIONS.
>> SO WHAT I WANTED TO DISCUSS
WITH YOU THIS EVENING SO THE
SLIDE READS TONIGHT'S TOPICS
WHY ANN ARBOR HAS CROSSWALK
DESIGN GUIDELINES, HOW THE
GUIDELINES WERE DEVELOPED, WHAT
NEW INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE TO
US AFTER HAVING AND THAT'S
REALLY AFTER HAVING DEVELOPED
AND USED THESE GUIDELINES FOR A
WHILE AND HOW STAFF USE THE
GUIDELINES.
>> AND SO I MOVE FORWARD TO OUR
NEXT SLIDE WHICH READS WHY
DEVELOP CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND WE HAVE A FIRST
GRAPHIC HERE AND WHAT I WANTED
TO EXPRESS TO EVERYONE I THAT
CREATING THE CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES WAS A RECOMMENDATION
THAT CAME OUT OF THE PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND ACCESS TASK FORCE
FINAL REPORT.
>> THAT REPORT WAS PRODUCED IN
2015 AND AS WE KNEW THAT THAT
WAS WAS GOING TO BE ONE
OF THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS WE
WERE REALLY PREPARED TO START
WORKING ON THAT AS SOON AS THE
FINAL REPORT CAME OUT WE
STARTED WORKING ON DEVELOPING
THESE GUIDELINES IN LATE 2015
AND THROUGHOUT 2016 AS WELL.
SO THIS PROCESS GRAPHIC SHOWS
THAT THE THINGS THAT DEVELOPED
AS THE AS THE REALLY COMPELLING
INTEREST WERE CONTEXT SENSITIVE
DESIGN, BEST PRACTICES,
CONSISTENCY AND PUTTING ALL
THOSE TOGETHER TO LEAD TOWARD
IMPROVED ACCESS AND SAFETY IN
CROSSWALKS WITH A PARTICULAR
EMPHASIS ON UNCONTROLLED
CROSSWALKS.
SO HOW DO WE DEVELOP THESE
GUIDELINES?
THE GUIDELINES STARTED AS A
STAFF RESEARCH PROJECT.
WE DID A REVIEW OF WHAT THE
CURRENT RESEARCH WAS TELLING US
AND INFORMING US AND WE DID A
REVIEW OF WHAT OUR CITIES WERE
DOING WITH THE
PRACTICES.
WE ALSO DID A REVIEW
OF NATIONAL BEST PRACTICES WE
DID A SYNTHESIS OF THAT TOOK IT
OUT FOR COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
AND WE HAD A PROCESS OF SEVERAL
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT MEETINGS
WHERE WE TALKED WITH THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT WHAT WAS
IMPORTANT, WHAT THEY WANTED US
TO FOCUS ON CREATING A SHARED
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT THE
VALUES FOR THE PROJECT WERE AND
WHAT WE WANTED OUR OUTCOMES TO
BE AND ALL OF THAT WORK TOWARDS
THAT GOAL OF AND AS I HAVE A
SMALL IMAGE ON HERE OF THAT
PROCESS FLOWCHART OF GETTING
GETTING TO THAT POINT AND AT
THIS POINT I REALLY DO WANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WE HAD GREAT,
GREAT REPRESENTATION FROM OUR
DISABILITIES COMMISSION IN THAT
PROCESS AND THAT WAS LARRY AND
THAT HE WAS REALLY VALUABLE,
INVALUABLE AND SO JUST REALLY
GREAT INPUT INTO THAT PROCESS
AND I'M STILL HAPPY ABOUT SO I
WANTED TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT AND
HE PROBABLY REMEMBERS A LOT
OF THIS STUFF
BUT SO MOVING ON
TO THE NEXT SLIDE, I WANTED TO
GIVE A
LITTLE BIT OF AN
OVERVIEW OF WHAT OUR GUIDELINES
ARE.
>> SO AS THE SLIDE READS, WE
HAVE SEVERAL USES FOR FOR THESE
CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES.
>> WE USE THEM WITH OUR
RESIDENT REQUESTS, WITH OUR
DESIGN PROJECTS, WITH OUR
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT
ASSESSMENT AND PLANNING FOR
FUTURE NEEDS.
>> THIS SITE ALSO HAS A GRAPHIC
OF THE THE DESIGN FLOWCHART.
>> COUPLE OF THINGS THAT ARE
REALLY IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT
ABOUT THIS FLOWCHART.
I CUT DOWN ON THE SLIDES BUT I
WANT TO HIGHLIGHT A FEW THINGS
SO THAT WE HAVE PLENTY OF TIME
FOR DISCUSSION.
THIS FLOWCHART HAS TWO SIDES TO
IT.
ONE IS FOR CONTROLLED
CROSSWALKS AND ONE IS FOR
UNCONTROLLED CROSSWALKS AND AS
WE WERE DEVELOPING THIS PROCESS
WE REALLY WANTED TO BE FORWARD
THINKING AND PROGRESSIVE AND
ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS THAT WE
DID WAS WE DECIDED THAT WE
DIDN'T NEED A MINIMUM NUMBER
OF PEDESTRIANS TO INSTALL A
CROSSWALK AT THE TIME THERE WAS
AND A BEST PRACTICE
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM SORT
OF POLICY THAT A LOT
OF AGENCIES HAD TOWARD HAVING A
MINIMUM NUMBER OF PEDESTRIANS
TO INSTALL A CROSSWALK.
>> WE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT OFTEN
CORRIDOR CAN BE A BARRIER TO
NON MOTORIZED ACTIVITY AND WE
DIDN'T WANT TO PERPETUATE
BARRIERS AND WE WANTED TO LOOK
AT THE SYSTEM AND SEE IF IN THE
CONTEXT OF THE SYSTEM DOES A
CONNECTION POINT MAKE HERE.
SO WE TOOK THAT DECISION OUT
THAT OUT OF THE GUIDELINES AND
THAT IS YOU KNOW, STAFF
EVALUATE EVERY REQUEST THAT WE
GET FOR A NEW CROSSWALK AND
DETERMINE IF IT MAKES SENSE IN
THE CONTEXT OF THE SYSTEM.
>> SO THIS PROCESS REALLY
STARTS AFTER HAVING MADE THE
DECISION THAT YES, WE'RE
INSTALLING A CROSSWALK HERE OR
IT STARTS AT THE POINT WHERE WE
HAVE AN EXISTING CROSSWALK AND
WE'RE EVALUATING I WILL ALSO
POINT OUT THAT THAT ONE OF THE
TOOLS THAT WE USE IS THE NC HRP
560 TO REPORT NOT IN HRP STANDS
FOR THE NATIONAL COLLABORATIVE
HIGHWAY RESEARCH PROGRAM.
>> SO THAT'S FEDERAL RESEARCH
AND THERE'S A TOOL THAT CAME
OUT OF THAT RESEARCH THAT WE
RELY ON.
IT'S A SPREADSHEET BASED TOOL
THAT TAKES ALL OF THESE INPUTS
YOU SEE OVER ON THE ON THE
RIGHT SIDE OF OUR FLOWCHART
WHERE WE'RE LOOKING AT
PEDESTRIAN VOLUME AND VEHICULAR
VOLUME CROSSING DISTANCE
WALKING SPEEDS, VEHICLE SPEEDS
AND WHAT ACROSS HISTORY IS AND
ALL OF THOSE DATA INPUTS GO IN
AND IT COMES OUT WITH KIND OF A
RISK ASSESSMENT AND WHAT TYPE
SOME SOME RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
WHAT TYPE OF CROSSWALK YOU NEED
TO BE INSTALLING AND WE USE
THAT THAT OUTPUT TO FEED INTO
OUR STANDARD DESIGN OPTIONS ARE
STANDARD PLUS DESIGN OPTIONS OR
OUR HIGH RISK DESIGN OPTION
CATEGORIES THAT TOOL REQUIRES A
MINIMUM PEDESTRIAN VOLUME IN IN
THE EVALUATION PROCESS.
>> SO WE WE ALWAYS FEEL AT THE
MINIMUM IF WE KNOW WHAT WE HAVE
AND IT EXCEEDS THE MINIMUM THEN
WE USE THAT NUMBER BUT WE
ALWAYS FEED THAT MINIMUM SO
THAT WE CAN PROCEED WITH THE
ANALYSIS JUST AS A KIND
OF DISCLAIMER THAT SOME OF OUR
CONSULTANTS HAVE THAT WE WORK
HAD A LITTLE BIT OF DIFFICULTY
WITH THAT BUT THAT'S ALWAYS THE
RECOMMENDATION THAT WE GIVE
THEM BECAUSE WE WANT THEM TO BE
USING THE OUTPUT OF THE TOOL.
>> SO AS I SAID WITH THIS
PROCESS IT LOOKS TO A LOT
OF DIFFERENT FACTORS AND THEN
YOU LOOKING AT THE VOLUME IN
THE CRASH HISTORY AND THE
CONTEXT THAT WE'RE DESIGNING
AND IT FEEDS INTO GIVING US
THIS OUTPUT OF ONE OF THESE
THREE STANDARD DESIGN OPTIONS
STANDARD PLUS DESIGN OPTIONS OR
THE HIGH-RISK DESIGN OPTIONS.
>> SO THAT STANDARD IS REALLY
THE BASELINE THAT WE WILL
ACCEPT ON ANY TYPE OF ROADWAY
AND WE DO THIS BOTH FOR THE
UNCONTROL CROSSWALKS AND FOR
THE CONTROL CROSSWALKS.
>> SO LET'S GO AHEAD AND MOVE
FORWARD TO THE NEXT SLIDE WHICH
REALLY SHOWS US WHAT THOSE
DESIGN OPTIONS ARE.
AS I SAID, THE SLIDE IT'S IT
GOES THROUGH DESIGN OPTIONS AND
THIS IS THE DESIGN SELECTION
FOR UNCONTROL CROSSWALKS.
THE SLIDE READS THAT WE SELECT
DEVICES BASED ON STREET TYPE
AND DESIGN LEVEL ITEMS
ACCUMULATE FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
AND NOT ALL DEVICES WILL BE
USED IN ALL LOCATIONS.
>> SO YOU IF WE LOOK AT THAT
CHART THERE'S A GRAPHIC ON THE
RIGHT SIDE OF THE SLIDE THAT IS
OUR OUR DESIGN OPTIONS MATRIX
AND THIS CHART HAS ROWS THAT
ARE STREET TYPE OF LOCAL
COLLECTOR MINOR AND MAJOR
ARTERIALS UNDER THREE LANES AND
MINOR AND MAJOR ARTERIALS
GREATER THAN OR EQUAL THREE
LANES OR MORE AND THOSE ARE
VEHICULAR LANES.
>> AND THEN WE HAVE A COLUMN
FOR STANDARD STANDARD PLUS IN
HIGH RISK AND IF WE LOOK AT
COLLECTOR THE STANDARD FOR AN
UNCONTROLLED CROSSWALK ON A
COLLECTOR STREET IS HIGH
VISIBILITY PAVEMENT MARKINGS IF
THERE'S ENOUGH ACTIVITY OR
SPEEDS ARE HIGH ENOUGH THAT WE
ARE UP INTO THAT STANDARD PLUS
DESIGN.
WHAT'S LISTED HERE ARE
PEDESTRIAN WARNING SERIES WHICH
IS OUR ELEVEN DASH TWO SIGNS
AND THOSE ARE THE THE DIAMOND
SIGNS WITH THE WALKING PERSON
ON THEM AND OR YOU COULD ALSO
HAVE THE SCHOOL WARNING SERIOUS
SIGNS AND THOSE ARE PENTAGONS
WITH POINTS UP AND IT HAS AN
ADULT AND A YOUTH WALKING
PERSON ON BOTH SIDES.
PUTTING THOSE SIGNS IN DOES NOT
PRECLUDE HAVING THE HIGH
VISIBILITY PAVEMENT MARK.
SO YOU STILL HAVE THE HIGH
VISIBILITY MARKINGS AND THEN
YOU'RE ADDING THE SIGNS AND
THEN IF WE'RE MOVING UP TO A
HIGH RISK LOCATION WHICH MIGHT
HAPPEN IF WE'VE HAD CRASHES
THROUGH HERE, THEN YOU'RE
LOOKING AT SOME ADDITIONAL
ITEMS MOVING TO THE NEXT SLIDE.
>> WE ALSO HAVE A DESIGN
SELECTION FOR OUR CONTROL
LOCATIONS SO THE SLIDE READS
THE SAME AS THE LAST SLIDE.
SELECTED DEVICES ARE BASED ON
STREET TYPE AND DESIGN LEVEL
ITEMS ACCUMULATE LEFT-TO-RIGHT
AND DEVICE OPTIONS DEVICE
OPTIONS ARE MORE LIMITED JUST
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE AS MUCH
FLEXIBILITY IN DESIGN BECAUSE
IT'S ALREADY A CONTROLLED
INTERSECTION.
>> THE CONTROL TYPES ARE STOP
CONTROLLED, SIGNALIZED AND
ROUNDABOUT THAT WE HAVE HERE.
EACH OF THOSE CONTROL TYPES IS
BROKEN UP BY STREET TYPE AND
THEN WE HAVE OUR DESIGN OPTIONS
FOR STANDARD STANDARD PLUS AND
HIGH RISK LOCATIONS AS WELL.
EXCUSE MOVING FORWARD.
>> I WANTED TO TOUCH ON WHAT
SOME OF OUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS ARE
HAVE BEEN SINCE WE FIRST
INSTALLED.
>> WELL WE FIRST STARTED USING
THE CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES.
>> NOW KEEP IN MIND WE FINISHED
THOSE UP IN TWENTY SIXTEEN.
>> WE STARTED USING THEM
IMMEDIATELY WITHIN OUR OUR OWN
DESIGN WORK AND THEN AS WE
STARTED USING THEM AND FINDING
THEM TO BE SUCCESSFUL WE
STARTED INCORPORATING THEM INTO
OTHER WORK AS WELL.
>> SO THIS SLIDE READS
ACCOMPLISHMENTS SYSTEMWIDE
UPDATES TO MEET OR EXCEED
MINIMUM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS ON
MAJOR STREETS.
>> SO THAT WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
BIG PROJECTS THAT WE DID WITH
THESE CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES.
>> WE LOOKED AT CORRIDORS
THROUGHOUT THE CITY AND ANALYZE
THEM TO FIGURE OUT WHERE WHAT
THE MINIMUM FOR THAT CORRIDOR
WAS AND MADE SURE HAD
WE'RE MEETING AT LEAST THE
MINIMUM ON ALL THE MAJOR
STREETS SINCE THEN WE STARTED
UPGRADING SOME OF THOSE
CROSSWALKS BUT WE DID MEET THAT
BASELINE FIRST ANOTHER
ACCOMPLISHMENT THAT WE HAVE IS
FULL UTILIZATION IN OUR DESIGN
EVALUATION AND DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS.
SO INTERNALLY TRANSPORTATION
STAFF ARE ALWAYS USING THESE
AND WHEN OUR COLLEAGUES WHO ARE
THE CAPITAL PROJECT MANAGERS OR
IN OUR DESIGN TEAM THEY KNOW
THAT THESE EXIST AND IF WE HAVE
A CROSSWALK THEY KNOW THAT WE
NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
EVALUATING THOSE AS PART
OF PROJECT.
I WOULD ALSO POINT OUT THIS
LAST BULLET POINT WHICH IS
INTEGRATION OF TRANSPORTATION
IMPACT ANALYSIS WELL I GUESS I
SHOULD SAY INTEGRATION WITH
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS
FOR UNCONTROLLED CROSSWALKS
DURING THE SITE PLAN REVIEW.
>> THIS IS A REALLY IMPORTANT
STEP BECAUSE AT THE TIME
WASN'T A GOOD WAY TO THERE
WASN'T A GOOD RESOURCE TO POINT
AN APPLICANT'S TEAM TOWARDS FOR
DETERMINING WHAT THEIR IMPACTS
TO AN UNCONTROLLED CROSSWALK
MIGHT BE.
>> SO IF YOU HAVE UNCONTROLLED
CROSSWALKS IN THEIR STUDY AREA
THIS IS HOW WE WERE HAVING
EVERYONE ANALYZE THOSE
CROSSWALKS AND SEE IF THEY WERE
HAVING AN IMPACT, IF THEY
NEEDED IF THERE NEEDED TO
ANY
UPGRADES TO A CROSSWALK PRIOR
TO HAVING THOSE NEW TRIPS IN AN
AREA AND MOVING TO MY NEXT
SLIDE I REALLY WANTED TO TOUCH
ON THE FACT THAT THESE
GUIDELINES WERE DEVELOPED IN
2015 AND 2016.
THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF NEW
RESEARCH THAT HAS COME OUT
THERE HAS ALSO BEEN A LOT
OF CHANGE TO CITY POLICY.
>> SO THIS SLIDE TOUCHES ON NEW
INFORMATION AND INNOVATIONS
THAT HAVE OCCURRED IN THE SLIDE
READS IMPROVING CROSSWALKS AND
FIELD GUIDE AND THAT IS A VERY
SHORTHAND WAY TO REFER TO TWO
REALLY IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS THAT
HAVE COME OUT OF THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION AND I'LL
BE COVERING THIS A LITTLE BIT
MORE IN THE NEXT SLIDE.
BOTH OF THESE DOCUMENTS A VERY
LONG TITLE SO I DIDN'T WANT TO
PUT THEM ALL THERE.
>> BUT THESE THESE NEW THIS NEW
GUIDANCE REALLY IS CONSISTENT
WITH THE CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINE THAT WE DEVELOPED
PRETTY MUCH IN PARALLEL TO WHEN
THEY WERE DEVELOPING THIS.
BUT IT'S THE INFORMATION IS
PRESENTED A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENTLY.
>> WE ALSO HAVE AN ARBOR MOVING
BEEN ADOPTED BY THE THAVE
SYSTEMS NATIONAL STRATEGY HAS
COME UP WHICH IS REALLY
SUPPORTING THE WORK THAT WE'RE
DOING WITH THESE CROSSWALKS AND
ALSO ANOTHER NEW THING THAT HAS
HAPPENED IS THAT THE THE
HIGHWAY CAPACITY MANUAL HAS A
NEW ADDITION AND I'M SURE A LOT
OF YOU ARE FAMILIAR WITH THE
CONCEPT OF THE HIGHWAY CAPACITY
MANUAL AND IT IS THAT SORT
OF TRADITIONAL WEAR LOOKING AT
VEHICULAR TRAFFIC FLOW AND
ASSIGNING A LEVEL OF SERVICE
AND THAT LEVEL SERVICE WAS
BASED DELAY IT WAS GRADED A TO
F A BEING GOOD AND FAILING AND
THAT THOSE THOSE MODULES THEY
LOOKED AT TO WAY STOP
CONTROLLING INTERSECTIONS WHERE
YOU JUST HAVE CONTROL ON SIDE
STREET, YOU KNOW, HIGHWAYS,
FREEWAYS, INTERCHANGES,
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS,
CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS AND IT
WAS ALWAYS A VERY VEHICULAR
BASED MODEL THEY HAVE STARTED
IN THE LAST COUPLE EDITIONS
INCORPORATING MORE INFORMATION
ON OTHER MODES OF TRAVEL AND
THIS NEW EDITION OF THE HIGHWAY
CAPACITY MANUAL WHICH IS
SEVENTH EDITION REALLY HAVE A
LOT MORE EMPHASIS ON BEING A
MULTIMODAL ANALYSIS AND IT IS
MULTIMODAL ACTUALLY IN THE NAME
OF IT NOW AND THIS IS THIS IS
REALLY IMPORTANT BUT I DON'T
HAVE A LOT TO SAY ABOUT IT
BECAUSE WE JUST GOT OUR COPY IN
THE LAST TWO WEEKS AND I'M JUST
STARTING TO DIG INTO IT.
>> BUT WHAT I HAVE LOOKED AT SO
FAR AS FAR AS A SIDEWALK LEVEL
OF SERVICE, IT LOOKS VERY
PROMISING.
>> SO I'M PRETTY EXCITED ABOUT
THAT AND I JUST WANTED TO POINT
THAT OUT AS AS BEING A NEW TOOL
IN OUR TOOLBOX.
>> OK, MOVING FORWARD, THIS
SLIDE IS MOSTLY GRAPHIC SLIDE
AND AS I SAID THAT THOSE TWO
DOCUMENTS THAT I BRIEFLY
REFERENCED IN THE SLIDE BEFORE
THIS THE GUIDE FOR IMPROVING
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AT
UNCONTROLLED CROSSING LOCATIONS
AND ITS COMPANION THE FIELD
GUIDE FOR SELECTING
COUNTERMEASURES AT UNCONTROLLED
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING LOCATIONS
AREUMENTS THAT THE
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
PRODUCED IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND
THESE DOCUMENTS ARE ARE REALLY
IMPORTANT.
>> ONE IS THAT THEY'RE KIND
OF GETTING AWAY FROM THE OLDER
PHILOSOPHY OF YOU HAVE TO HAVE
A CERTAIN NUMBER OF PEDESTRIANS
AND AND HOW YOU LOOKED AT
DETERMINING HOW HOW YOU NEED TO
DESIGN A CROSSWALK.
SO THEY'VE TAKEN THAT VOLUME
COMPONENT FOR PEDESTRIANS OUT
AND THIS FIGURE THAT'S SHOWN
HERE IS AND IT'S FROM
THE FIELD GUIDE AND IT HAS A
COLUMN FOR ROADWAY
CONFIGURATION AND THAT'S BASED
ON VEHICULAR LANE.
SO WE HAVE TWO LANES, THREE
LANES WITH A RAISED MEDIAN,
THREE LANES WITHOUT A RAISED
MEDIAN, FOUR LANES WITH A
RAISED MEDIAN AND FOUR LANES
WITHOUT A MEDIAN.
>> THEN THERE ARE THREE LARGE
BRACKETS THAT ARE BASED ON
VEHICULAR VOLUME.
SO YOU HAVE STREETS THAT ARE
UNDER NINE THOUSAND VEHICLES
PER DAY THAT ARE BETWEEN NINE
THOUSAND AND FIFTEEN THOUSAND
AND STREETS THAT ARE OVER
FIFTEEN THOUSAND.
AND WITHIN THOSE THREE LARGER
BRACKETS THERE ARE BREAKDOWNS
FOR SPEED AND THAT'S BASED ON
UNDER UNDER OR EQUAL TO 30
MILES PER HOUR.
THIRTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR AND
40 OR ABOVE AND THERE ARE A
WHOLE LIST OF DEVICES THAT ARE
COUNTERMEASURES AND THEY'RE
NUMBERED ONE THROUGH NINE
YOU'LL RECOGNIZE THOSE AS ALL
EXISTING IN OUR CROSSWALK
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND THE
NUMBERS THAT YOU SEE IN THE
DIFFERENT SQUARES A THEY
CORRELATE TO THOSE DEVICES AND
YOU CAN YOU KNOW, THERE ARE
ITEMS THAT YOU SHOULD REALLY BE
CONSIDERING IN THIS LOCATION.
>> YOU LIKE YOU ALWAYS NEED TO
BE INSTALLING.
>> THOSE ARE THE LITTLE BLACK
ONES AND THAT'S THAT'S PAVEMENT
MARKINGS AND THEN ITEMS THAT
YOU KNOW, IT'S A REALLY GOOD
IDEA TO DO IT AND THEN ITEMS
THAT YOU COULD THINK ABOUT AND
THEN IF IF A NUMBER IS MISSING
THAT MEANS IT'S NOT RECOMMENDED
FOR THAT LOCATION.
>> SO WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR
OUR CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES
CURRENTLY THE WAY STAFF IS
USING THIS TOOL IS THAT WE WHEN
EVALUATING LOCATION WE'LL LOOK
AT IT THROUGH OUR CROSSWALK
DESIGN GUIDELINES BUT THEN
WE'LL ALSO LOOK AT THIS THIS
GUIDANCE FROM FEDERAL HIGHWAY
AND MOST OF THE TIME THEY LINE
AND THEY COME UP WITH THE SAME
RESULT ACASE ONLY ONE OR THE
OTHER WILL BE MORE CONSERVATIVE
AND WE ALWAYS TAKE THE MORE
CONSERVATIVE DESIGN.
>> SO I REALIZED THAT ALL
OF THAT WAS A LITTLE BIT QUICK
BUT I THOUGHT WE WERE GOING TO
HAVE LESS TIME AND I WANTED TO
MAKE SURE WE HAD PLENTY OF TIME
TO ANSWER QUESTIONS AND HAVE
DISCUSSION AND SO I JUST WANTED
YOU I HAVE MY QUESTIONS LIKE
BECAUSE I ALWAYS MAKE MY
QUESTIONS SLIDE AND THE SLIDE
IS IS SHOWING AN IMAGE OF THE
NEW INTERSECTION OF NORTH U AND
STATE STREET.
IT LOOKS REALLY COOL SO I WILL
LEAVE MY SLIDE DECK SHOULD I
LEAVE MY SLIDE DECK UP IN CASE
WE NEED TO REFERENCE SOMETHING
OR DO YOU WANT ME TO TAKE DOWN
FOR NOW I CAN FORESEE MAYBE
REFERENCING SOME OF THE TABLES
SO I CAN SEE RAISED HAND SO IF
YOU COULD USE THE RAISED HAND
FEATURE OR OR LARRY JUST KNEW
THAT WORKS TO SO LET'S LET'S DO
THAT.
LET'S START WITH PETER SO IF WE
COULD GO BACK TO THE TABLE THAT
HAS THE GUIDELINES FOR
UNCONTROL CROSSON THIS TABLE OR
THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY TO CITY TO
TOOK SO GENERALLY I DO WISH
THAT THIS WAS A LITTLE MORE
PROSCRIPTIVE AND I'VE GOT A
COUPLE OF CRITIQUES.
I GUESS ONE OF THEM IS THAT WE
HAVE LESS THAN THREE LANE LESS
THAN OR EQUAL TO THREE LANES IN
ONE ROW AND WE HAVE GREATER
THE OTHER ROW.
THAN OR EQUAL TO THREE LANES IN
SO IT'S TECHNICALLY A THREE
THE OTHER ROW.
LANE MINOR MAJOR ARTERIAL COULD
SO IT'S TECHNICALLY A THREE
USE EITHER OF THOSE TWO ROWS.
LANE MINOR MAJOR ARTERIAL COULD
SO WE NEED TO WE NEED TO
USE EITHER OF THOSE TWO ROWS.
CLARIFY WHERE A THREE LANE ROAD
SO WE NEED TO WE NEED TO
REALLY GOES.
CLARIFY WHERE A THREE LANE ROAD
>> RAMPOLLA AGIS THAT IS A
REALLY GOES.
TYPOGRAPHICAL ERROR THAT I DID
>> RAMPOLLA AGIS THAT IS A
NOT CATCH AS I WAS RECYCLING
TYPOGRAPHICAL ERROR THAT I DID
THESE SLIDES FROM THE LAST AND
NOT CATCH AS I WAS RECYCLING
THE THREE LANES WOULD GO IN THE
THESE SLIDES FROM THE LAST AND
HIGHER BRACKET IN THE TO THE
THE THREE LANES WOULD GO IN THE
SECOND FROM THE BOTTOM OK YES.
HIGHER BRACKET IN THE TO THE
>> SO MINOR AND MAJOR ARTERIALS
SECOND FROM THE BOTTOM OK YES.
THREE LANES ARE MORE THE OTHER
>> SO MINOR AND MAJOR ARTERIALS
.
THREE LANES ARE MORE THE OTHER
THE OTHER QUESTION I HAVE ABOUT
.
THIS SLIDE THAT IS WE SAY NOT
THE OTHER QUESTION I HAVE ABOUT
ALL DEVICES WILL BE USED IN ALL
THIS SLIDE THAT IS WE SAY NOT
LOCATIONS.
ALL DEVICES WILL BE USED IN ALL
SO WE'VE WE'VE SAID WHAT SHOULD
LOCATIONS.
BE CONSIDERED THEN WE'VE
SO WE'VE WE'VE SAID WHAT SHOULD
IMMEDIATELY SAID WE'RE NOT
BE CONSIDERED THEN WE'VE
GOING TO USE ALL OF THEM.
IMMEDIATELY SAID WE'RE NOT
WE HAVEN'T SAID HOW MANY
GOING TO USE ALL OF THEM.
OF THEM WE'RE GOING TO USE AND
WE HAVEN'T SAID HOW MANY
SO ACCORDING TO THIS PAGE WE
OF THEM WE'RE GOING TO USE AND
CAN DO ANYTHING AND MEET AND
SO ACCORDING TO THIS PAGE WE
STILL BE CONSISTENT WITH THE
CAN DO ANYTHING AND MEET AND
GUIDELINE.
STILL BE CONSISTENT WITH THE
SO I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO SAY
GUIDELINE.
THAT I WOULD LIKE IT AS I SAID,
SO I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO SAY
TO BE MORE PRESCRIPTIVE MAYBE
THAT I WOULD LIKE IT AS I SAID,
NOT ALL DEVICES WILL BE USED
TO BE MORE PRESCRIPTIVE MAYBE
BUT SOME MINIMUM NUM
NOT ALL DEVICES WILL BE USED
TO BE CHOSEN.
BUT SOME MINIMUM NUM
WE NEED TO USE WE NEED TO USE
TO BE CHOSEN.
TWO TO THREE OR WE NEED SOME
WE NEED TO USE WE NEED TO USE
SOME GOOD INDICATION FOR WHY
TWO TO THREE OR WE NEED SOME
WE'RE USING ONE OF THEM
.
SO AS IT IS THIS THESE
GUIDELINES FEEL LIKE WE WE CAN
USE THESE THINGS, USE ANY
OF THESE THINGS ANYWHERE AND
CHOOSE NOT TO USE THEM ALSO.
>> SO THAT'S I GUESS THAT'S MY
MY MAJOR CRITIQUE OF OUR
GUIDELINES.
>> RIGHT.
THANK YOUHA AND THIS IS
REALLY HELPFUL.
SO THANK YOU FOR THE
PRESENTATION.
JUST HAVE A FEW QUESTIONS.
SO ONE QUESTION I HAVE IS
RELATED TO THE FACT THAT YOU
SAID THAT THERE'S NEW
INFORMATION AND INNOVATIONS
HAVE COME ABOUT SINCE WE
CREATED THIS AND IT SOUNDS LIKE
STAFF ARE STARTING TO DIG IN.
DOES IT MAKE SENSE FOR THIS
GROUP TO TAKE AND I'M NOT SURE
WHAT LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT THIS
GROUP HAD BEFORE AND UPDATING
OUR STANDARDS WITH FRESH EYES
BASED ON SOME OF THE NEW
FEDERAL GUIDELINES AND RESEARCH
COMING OUT, I CAN ANSWER THE
QUESTION OF WHAT LEVEL
OF INVOLVEMENT THIS GROUP HAD
IN THAT PROCESS NONE BECAUSE IT
DIDN'T EXIST.
SO THIS IS THE STABILITY OF THE
ONE.
YEAH, YES.
AND AS I SAID, YOU KNOW, THE
THE THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY IT CAME
OUT IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND IT
IT HAS BEEN A COMPANION TO THE
WORK THAT WE'RE DOING AND
TYPICALLY THEY COME OUT IN THE
SAME PLACE.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT YOU MEAN BY
THAT SORT.
YOU MEAN SO IF I PICK A
LOCATION AND I RUN IT THROUGH
OUR CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES
AND THEN I IN PARALLEL RUN IT
THROUGH THE FEDERAL HIGHWAYS
FIELD GUIDE WE USUALLY COME UP
WITH BOTH PROCESSES USUALLY
COME UP WITH THE SAME SET
OF SOLUTIONS.
>> OK, AND OK GO AHEAD SIR.
>> IF ONE OF THEM IS IS MORE
CONSERVATIVE THAN THE OTHER ONE
WILL GO WITH THE CONSERVATIVE
DESIGN.
>> OK UM DO WE EVER LOOK AT I
THINK YOU SUGGESTED THAT MAYBE
WE DO KIND OF A QUALITATIVE
LOOK AT BEFORE AND AFTER BUT
I'M PARTICULARLY INTERESTED IN
SITES WHERE THERE HAVE BEEN
CRASHES IF WE COLLECT DATA KIND
OF BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT
TO EVALUATE HOW SUCCESSFUL OUR
IMPLEMENTATION WAS, WE HAVE
THAT DATA.
WE DO NOT RUN OUT BEFORE AND
AFTER I EVERY LOCATION THAT WE
UPDATE BECAUSE YOU KNOW, AN
UPDATE CAN BE GOING FROM
STRAIGHT SIX INCH CROSSWALKS,
MARKINGS TO CONTINENTAL HIGH
VISIBILITY CROSSWALK MARKINGS
OR IT CAN BE ADDING ASSIGNER IT
CAN BE ADDING A LIKE BRIGHT
SIDES SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
DOING IN A MORE SYSTEMIC NATURE
AND THERE MIGHT NOT HAVE BEEN
ACROSS THE STREET AT A LOCATION
.
>> WHAT WE ARE ROUTINELY
TRACKING IS WHAT THE SYSTEM IS
DOING.
AND THEN ANOTHER QUESTION IS DO
WE EVALUATE I DON'T KNOW WHAT
THE TERMINOLOGY WOULD BE FOR
THIS BUT SIGHTLINES AND THE
REASON WHY I BRING THIS UP IS
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN TALKING TO
SOME PEOPLE ABOUT CROSSWALKS
AROUND PIONEER HIGH SCHOOL AND
THERE'S ONE PARTICULAR CORNER
THAT'S ACTUALLY OUT
OF SIGNALIZED STEP BUT ON BOTH
CORNERS THERE'S SORT OF FENCING
AND BRUSHES THAT MAKE IT VERY
DIFFICULT TO KIND OF SEE AROUND
SO LONG STORY SHORT, I'M JUST
WONDERING IF THAT'S UNDER
CONSIDERATION AS WE IMPLEMENT
CROSSINGS.
YES, IT IS A STANDARD
CONSIDERATION.
OK, AND THEN JUST IN CLOSING
THAT'S MY QUESTIONS.
I WOULD JUST SUGGEST THAT I'M
NOT SURE HOW THE REST OF THE
COMMISSION FEELS BUT I WOULD
WELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE
A FRESH LOOK AT THESE AND SEE
IF WE YOU KNOW, IT'S TIME TO
UPDATE OR TWEAK ANYTHING JUST
BECAUSE IT SOUNDS LIKE THINGS
ABOUT THAT MIGHT BE GOOD TO
TAKE A FRESH LOOK, I WAS JUST
ABOUT TO ASK TO WHAT EXTENT ARE
YOU AND YOUR TEAM IN THE
PROCESS OF UPDATING OUR
APPROACH OR LOOKING TO UPDATE
OUR APPROACH AND I FEEL LIKE I
SENSE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A
SUBCOMMITTEE EITHER MAYBE OR TO
ROLL THIS INTO THE LARGER
APPROACH ABOUT HOW WE HANDLE
STREET RESURFACING AS A MATTER
OF COURSE IN THE CITY IN YEAH.
WHERE ARE YOU ON ON UPDATING
OUR APPROACH MY TECHNICAL
RECOMMENDATION IF WE'RE
INTERESTED IN MAKING AN UPDATE
IN A CHANGE WOULD BE TO JUST
UTILIZE THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
GUIDELINES THERE STANDARD ALL
OF OUR CONSULTANTS ARE FAMILIAR
WITH THEM.
>> THEY ARE EASY TO UTILIZE.
>> THEY THERE ARE THINGS
COMPROMISES THAT WE MADE WHEN
WE SET UP OUR CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES WHERE WE WANTED TO
BE ABLE TO DO THINGS BY PROXY
IF WE NEEDED TO.
SO IF WE NEEDED TO MAKE A PROXY
DECISION WITHOUT HAVING
VEHICULAR DATA AND A BLOCK OR
IN A CHUNK OF STREET OR MORE
RECENT MORE UP TO DATE, THAT'S
PART OF THE REASON WHY YOU
KNOW, THINGS ARE BROKEN DOWN BY
STREET HYPE AND YOU KNOW, WE
WANTED TO BE ABLE TO SORT
OF HAVE THAT LITTLE BIT OF A
PROXY SELECTION.
BUT REALLY WHAT WE WERE
STRIVING TO ACCOMPLISH WITH
THESE GUIDELINES IS WELL
ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY DOCUMENT, ALTHOUGH I
WILL POINT OUT THAT THAT IS
JUST FOR UNCONTROLLED LOCATIONS
AND FREQUENTLY WE'RE
HAVING THESE DISCUSSIONS, THE
LOCATIONS THAT ARE IN
EVERYONE'S MIND REALLY ARE
THOSE UNCONTROLLED LOCATIONS
AND THEY'RE NOT AS MUCH THE
SIGNALIZED LOCATIONS WE'RE LIKE
ALWAYS STOP CONTROLLED
LOCATIONS SO MY MY
RECOMMENDATION IS THAT WE WANT
TO UPDATE THINGS THAT THAT IS
AN EXCELLENT TOOL TO BE
UPDATING IS A REALLY WELL DONE
DOCUMENT AND ARE REALLY WELL
DONE PROCESS AND IT WOULD BE
EASY FOR STAFF AND CONSULTANTS
TO FOLLOW.
>> OK, THAT'S THE TABLE LATER
THE SLIDES RIGHT?
YES.
YOU GO TO THAT BRIEFLY JUST
WHILE WE'RE ON THIS REAL QUICK
.
SO THERE ARE VERY FEW DARK
COLORED CIRCLES HERE WHICH ARE
THE SHOULD ALWAYS BE CONSIDERED
CATEGORY AND THEN THERE ARE
MANY, MANY, MANY USUALLY OTHER
OPTIONS THAT ARE LISTED.
SO I GUESS IF THE CITY WERE TO
ADOPT THIS I WOULD I MEAN WHEN
IT ONLY CONSIDER ITSELF
RESPONSIBLE TO INCORPORATE THE
DARK COLORED CIRCLES OR THAT'S
A GREAT QUESTION AND THE ANSWER
IS NO BECAUSE ALL OF THOSE NOT
DARK CIRCLES ARE THINGS THAT
YOU HAVE TO MAKE AN ENGINEERING
DECISION AND THE SAME IS TRUE
WITH OUR CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND THAT THERE ARE
OPTIONS IN THERE PARTICULARLY
BECAUSE RIGHT OF WAY IS A
CONSTRAINED RESOURCE AND A
PARTICULAR LOCATION MAY HAVE AN
OPTION FOR BUMP OUTS OR A
PEDESTRIAN ISLAND AND THE TEAM
HAS TO MAKE A DESIGN DECISION
AS TO WHICH OF THOSE FEATURES
MAKE SENSE WITH THE SPACE THAT
WE HAVE.
SO THERE'S STILL A NEED TO
ALLOW FOR SOME ENGINEERING
JUDGMENT AND THAT'S WHY YOU
DON'T HAVE MORE OF THE BLACK
CIRCLES.
>> BUT THE WAY YOU WOULD BE
APPLYING THIS PARTICULAR
DOCUMENT SO IF YOU WERE LOOKING
AT LET'S SAY THE VERY FIRST
SQUARE, IT'S A TWO LANE STREET
UNDERNEATH A THOUSAND YOU ARE
YOU'RE UNDER 30 MILES PER HOUR
.
>> YOU SHOULD HAVE CROSSWALK
MARKINGS AND AND IF YOU HAVE
CROSSWALK MARKINGS THEY SHOULD
BE VISIBILITY.
YOU SHOULD HAVE PARKING
RESTRICTED SO THAT YOU CAN HAVE
APPROPRIATE SIGHT DISTANCE AND
AND ADEQUATE NIGHTTIME LIGHTING
LEVELS.
THERE ARE THINGS THAT WE ARE
CURRENTLY ADDRESSING.
SO HAVING ALL OF THOSE THINGS
THERE ON ON STREETS IS IS A
TYPICAL DESIGN PRACTICE OF THE
CITIES ALREADY.
>> BUT THEN KNOW OUR OTHER
NUMBERS ARE TWO WHICH IS A
RAISED CROSSWALK.
FOUR IS OCCUR IS THE PEDESTRIAN
CROSSING SIGN FIVE IS A CURB
EXTENSION, SIX IS A PEDESTRIAN
REFUGE AND YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
BUILD A RAISED CROSSWALK AND A
PEDESTRIAN REFUGE ISLAND AND
CURB EXTENSIONS OR BUMP OUTS
ALL IN THE SAME CROSSWALK
YOU'RE GOING TO PICK WHICH ONE
MAKES THE BEST SENSE FOR THE
LOCATION FOR THE AREA IF YOU
WANTED TO RAISE THAT CROSSWALK
AND DO A TRULY SIDEWALK HEIGHT,
THE SIDEWALK HEIGHT CROSSING
YOUR CURRENT DRAINAGE
INFRASTRUCTURE MIGHT LINE UP
PERFECTLY FOR THAT AND THEN
THAT'S AN OPTION IF IT'S NOT
AND REDESIGNATE THE UNDERGROUND
STORMWATER SYSTEM IS OUTSIDE
OF YOUR BUDGET THEN YOU MIGHT
BE LOOKING AT A PEDESTRIAN
REFUGE ISLAND BECAUSE THE CURB
EXTENSIONS WOULD ALSO BE A
PROBLEM.
>> SO THOSE ARE KIND OF LIKE
THE DESIGN TRADE OFFS THAT OR
DESIGN DECISIONS I SHOULD SAY
THATE MADE WITH THOSE
NOT DARK NUMBERS.
>> OK, YEAH THANK YOU.
YEAH THIS IS I THINK THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO STRIVE FOR THE
MOST AND HAVE TO BE CONVINCED
WHY NOT ESPECIALLY LIKE IN THE
NUMBER FOUR TO RAISED CROSSWELL
THIS IS A VERTICAL ELEMENT THAT
RIGHT NOW I THINK IT SEEMS TO
REALLY ONLY BE PROVIDED BY
THROUGH OUR TRAFFIC
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM.
RIGHT.
AND THIS KIND OF MAYBE GIVES US
THE OPPORTUNITY TO MOVE THAT
INTO OTHER TOOLBOXES OUTSIDE
JUST THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM PERSONALLY IT'S
SOMETHING THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
SEE.
BUT LET ME GET BACK TO THE
OTHER COMMISSIONERS, MOLLY.
YEAH, SO I HAVE A QUESTION.
IF WE WERE TO USE THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY FEDERAL HIGHWAY
GUIDELINES THAT THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
GUIDELINES I'M CURIOUS HOW
THOSE ALIGNED WITH OUR MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION ZERO
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND THE
COUNTERMEASURES THAT ARE
RECOMMENDED IN THERE.
I MY IMPRESSION IS THAT IN
GENERAL THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION HAS PRIORITIES
THAT ARE PERHAPS DIFFERENT FROM
OURS AS A CITY WHEN IT COMES TO
ALLOCATING SPACE ON ROADS AND
MOVING PEOPLE THROUGH SPACES
AND SO I MEAN I'M SURE THAT'S
HELPED INFORM THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
BUT I'M CURIOUS ABOUT HOW WELL
YOU FEEL THOSE GUIDELINES ALIGN
WITH THE VISION THAT'S OUTLINED
IN THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
>> THESE GUIDELINES ARE
CONSISTENT WITH VISION ZERO
DESIGN.
>> THESE GUIDELINES ARE
DEVELOPED TO BE COUNTERMEASURE
SELECTION TOOL EXPLICITLY FOR
IMPROVING PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AT
CONTROLLED LOCATIONS AND I
HISTORICALLY I WOULD SAY THAT
YOUR CONCERN IS VALID AND AND
ON SECTION YOU KNOW, ON THE
FREEWAY SYSTEM THAT IS STILL
VERY MUCH A VALID POINT BECAUSE
THAT IS ALL ABOUT MOVING
VEHICLES.
>> BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
TO RECOGNIZE THE WORK THAT
FEDERAL HIGHWAY HAS BEEN DOING
THROUGH THEIR STEPS PROGRAM
THROUGH THEIR EVERYDAY COUNTS
PROGRAM AND MOVING MOVING THAT
WHOLE SYSTEM TOWARD THE SAFE
SYSTEMS NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR
ELIMINATING FATALITIES OR
SERIOUS INJURIES.
>> THANK YOU, PETER.
>> MY QUESTION WAS ESSENTIALLY
WHAT MOLLY JUST ASKED BUT I
GUESS I WILL ALSO ADD THAT WE
HAVE VERY AMBITIOUS GOALS FOR
CUTTING DOWN ON VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED AND ENCOURAGING PEOPLE
TO WALK AND BIKE INSTEAD THAT I
MEAN AMBITIOUS GOALS THAT I
DON'T THINK THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT SHARES.
>> SO I I GUESS I AM NOT
TOTALLY SURE HOW HOW WELL
ALIGNED THESE THESE GUIDELINES
WOULD BE WITH OUR AMBITIOUS
GOALS FOR ENCOURAGING WALKING,
BIKING AND SO FORTH.
SO MAYBE THIS WOULD BE A GOOD
STARTING POINT BUT I I FEEL
LIKE WE WOULD STILL NEED TO
TAKE A CLOSE LOOK AT THEM AND
MAKE SURE THAT THEY ARE ALIGNED
US WHAT WE WANT IN OUR
COMMUNITY BEFORE WE WHERE WE
ADOPT THEM.
THAT WAS ONE THING.
AND THEN ALSO TO YOUR POINT
ABOUT THE POSSIBLE DESIGN
TRADEOFFS THAT IF DRAINAGE
DOESN'T SUPPORT ONE DESIGN THEN
WE COULD USE A DIFFERENT DESIGN
ELEMENT.
I'M OK WITH DESIGN GUIDELINES
THAT ALLOW THAT KIND
OF FLEXIBILITY.
BUT THE WAY IT SHOULD BE STATED
IS YOU HAVE TO USE ONE OF THESE
THREE TREATMENTS.
YOU HAVE TO USE THE ONE THAT'S
MOST APPROPRIATE AND I DON'T
SEE THAT KIND OF PHRASEOLOGY IN
OUR CITY DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
I DON'T SEE IT IN HERE EITHER.
IT SAYS YOU SHOULD CONSIDER ALL
OF THEM WHICH IMPLIES THAT
USING NONE OF THEM IS ALSO OK
SO LONG AS YOU CONSIDER THEM
AND I AM LOOKING LIKE I SAID
BEFORE, THE GUIDELINES THAT ARE
MORE PRESCRIPTIVE AND THAT
REQUIRE US TO DO MORE TO
PROTECT PEOPLE CROSSING THE
STREET EITHER DO MORE OR
EXPLAIN WHY THAT IS A REALLY
GOOD REASON WHY WE CAN'T DO
MORE.
THOSE ARE THE GUIDELINES I'M
LOOKING FOR
MOLLY.
I FORGOT TO PUT MY HAND ON
HAVING TO DO THE SAME THING AT
YEAH I'M STILL ADJUSTING THE UM
YEAH I THINK PETER SAID IF IF
AGAIN IF WE WERE TO ADOPT
SOMETHING LIKE WHAT WE'RE
SEEING HERE THE COLORED IN
CIRCLES ARE GREAT AND
EVERYTHING BUT I WOULDN'T WANT
TO HAVE A THE NUMBERS THAT
AREN'T CIRCLED SEEM TO HAVE
KIND OF A LOWER OR VERY
OPTIONAL STATUS AND I WOULDN'T
WANT THAT TO BE THE CASE.
I WANT US TO INTERPRET ALL
OF THE OPTIONS SHOWN AS STRONG
CONSIDERATIONS AND NOT LIKE
PETER SAID WE THOUGHT ABOUT IT
BUT NOW YEAH.
SO I DON'T KNOW I WE'LL HAVE TO
TALK ABOUT THIS AS MAYBE A
FUTURE AGENDA ITEM THIS ITEM TO
SEND A RECOMMENDATION OR I
THINK THERE NEEDS TO BE A LOT
MORE WORK BEFOREHAND THOUGH TO
ACTUALLY REALLY DIG INTO WHAT'S
HERE AND COMPARE IT TO WHAT WE
HAVE NOW, ESPECIALLY THE
VERTICAL ELEMENTS IS SOMETHING
NEW THAT IS NOT AT ALL PART
OF OUR CURRENT CROSSWELL
GUIDELINES.
RIGHT.
THERE IS JUST THE VIRTUE
OF HAVING A RAISED CROSSWALK
HERE, SOMETHING VERY NEW AND
HOPEFULLY THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
WOULD BE ACCEPTABLE.
I COULD SEE THIS COMING BACK.  S
THAT I DIDN'T HAVE ANYTHING
ELSE?
OK, THERE'S LS LET'S GO BACK TO
THE NINE SCREEN SHARE THE
DEFINITELY THERE WE GO.
OK GO BACK TO THE RIGHT.
SO SEEING NO OTHER COMMENTS
THAT'S I GUESS RAYMOND IS OUR
RIGHT TO TO MOVE ON TO THE NEXT
TOPIC.
YES OK ALRIGHT THANK YOU VERY
MUCH CYNTHIA THAT WAS REALLY
REALLY INFORMATIVE.
OK NEXT UP SIDEWALK GAP
PRIORITIZATION PROCESS THE NICK
NICK WILL GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THE SIDEWALK GAP
PRIORITIZATION PROCESS AND
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS ALL RIGHT
.
THANK YOU.
LET ME SHOW MY SCREEN HERE AND
BY OK EVERYBODY SEE THAT?
>> YES.
OK COOL.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO IT'S KIND OF FUNNY CINTHIA
KIND OF TOOK SOME OF THE WORDS
OUT OF MY MOUTH HERE AND SAYING
THAT WE PRESENTED THIS TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION A
LONG TIME AGO BUT WE'VE GOT
MOSTLY NEW PEOPLE NOW SO WE'RE
KIND OF DOING THE SAME THING
HERE WITH DOING A REFRESHER ON
THIS AND A LITTLE BIT OF AN
UPDATE ON WHERE WE WHERE WE
STAND WITH SIDEWALK GAP
PRIORITIZATION.
THERE WE GO.
OK, SO I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH
A BRIEF LITTLE HISTORY LESSON
HERE AND THEN I'M GOING TO
SPEND MOST OF THE TIME TALKING
ABOUT THE PRIORITIZATION SYSTEM
ITSELF AND THEN TALK ABOUT HOW
WE HOW WE ACTUALLY TAKE THAT
INTO PROGRAMING A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THE CHALLENGES WE FACE IN
A QUICK PREVIEW OF UPCOMING
PROJECTS TO SROM THE HISTORY
PERSPECTIVE HERE, THE NEED TO
FILL SIDEWALK GAPS IS SOMETHING
THAT WAS IDENTIFIED QUITE A
WHILE AGO.
IT WAS IDENTIFIED IN THE OLD
NOT MOTORIZED PLAN WHICH
PREDATED THE CURRENT
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND AS FAR
AS I CAN TELL, PLACEHOLDER WAS
PUT IN THE SIPP OR SIDEWALK
FILLING BACK SOMEWHERE AROUND
TWENTY TWO THOUSAND SIX SORRY
BUT IT SAT THERE FOR A WHILE
BEFORE ANYTHING REALLY GOT
MOVING ON IT AND THE NEED TO
PRIORITIZE WAS SOMETHING THAT
WAS IDENTIFIED PRETTY SOON
PRETTY EARLY
ON AND I'LL TALK
LIKE THAT.
I'LL TALK MORE ABOUT THAT IN A
MINUTE HERE.
BUT WE DID START MOVING AHEAD
WITH MORE SIDEWALK GAP FILLING
PROJECTS THE EARLY 2010S IT WAS
SOMEWHAT SLOW AND PART OF THE
ISSUE THERE IS THAT AT THAT
TIME CITY CODE STILL REQUIRED
THAT WE SPECIAL ACCESS FOR NEW
SIDEWALKS MEANING THAT THE
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER HAD TO
PAY FOR THAT COST THAT LED INTO
THE WHAT WE CALLED THE NEW
SIDEWALK KNOWLEDGE THE SIDEWALK
GAP VILLAGE IF YOU WANT TO CALL
IT THAT THAT WAS APPROVED BY
VOTERS IN TWENTY TWENTY.
THAT MILLAGE PROVIDES
APPROXIMATELY ONE POINT FOUR
MILLION DOLLARS PER YEAR AND AS
PART OF THAT ADOPTION BY VOTERS
CITY CODE WAS CHANGED SO THAT
PARCELS THAT ARE CURRENTLY ON
THE TAX ROLL DO NOT HAVE TO BE
SPECIAL SESTRA THOSE ANYMORE SO
THAT REMOVED A BIG HURDLE IN
SIDEWALK GAP FILLING GAVE A
DEDICATED FUNDING SOURCE AND WE
DIDN'T HAVE TO GO THROUGH THE
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS.
SO THE PRIORITIZATION SYSTEM
WHICH WAS THE FIRST VERSION SET
UP IN TWENTY SEVENTEEN WHICH
WAS NOT THAT LONG AGO BUT HAS
GONE THROUGH A COUPLE
OF RENOVATIONS SINCE THEN WE'RE
ACTUALLY ON VERSION 3.0 RIGHT
NOW.
SO GAP BEFORE I REALLY GET TO
TALKING ABOUT GAP
PRIORITIZATION OF THE FIRST
KIND OF QUESTION THAT COMES UP
IS WHAT IS A SIDEWALK GAP
EXACTLY AND THE WAY WE'VE
DEFINED A SIDEWALK GAP IS ANY
LOCATION IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY ADJACENT TO A STREET
THAT DOES NOT CURRENTLY HAVE
SIDEWALKS ON IT.
SO WE DO THINK OF A TRADITIONAL
GAP AS MAYBE LIKE A PARCEL OR
TWO WHERE THERE'S NO SIDEWALK
BUT THERE SIDEWALK EITHER END.
THAT'S CERTAINLY A GAP
OBVIOUSLY BUT ALSO A SIDEWALK
GAP IS ALSO IN THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE THERE
OTHERWISE IS NO SIDEWALK WE
WOULD THAT'S ALSO SCORED ON OUR
PRIORITIZATION SYSTEM AS WELL.
SO A LITTLE BIT OF DATA HERE ON
OUR SIDEWALKS.
WE HAVE FOUR HUNDRED AND FORTY
MILES OF EXISTING SIDEWALKS ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY TWO MILES
OF GAPS AS WE DEFINE THEM AS I
JUST DESCRIBED.
AND WE HAVE MADE SOME PROGRESS.
WE'VE WE'VE ADDED ABOUT 13
MILES OF SIDEWALKS SINCE SINCE
TWENTY THIRTEEN FOR EXAMPLE.
>> NOW THE INITIAL
PRIORITIZATION EFFORT REALLY
CAME OUT OF THE PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND ACCESS TASK FORCE
WHICH PREDATED THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
>> I BELIEVE.
AND AS WE DEVELOP THE SYSTEM
INITIALLY ONE OF THE THINGS WE
RECOGNIZED IS WITH ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY TWO MILES OF SIDEWALK
GAPS WE DID NOT HAVE AND STILL
DO NOT HAVE THE STAFF RESOURCES
TO MANUALLY EVALUATE EVERY GAP
IN THE SYSTEM THROUGH THE
CRITERIA THAT WE WANT TO.
SO WE WANTED TO MAKE IT AS
AUTOMATED AS POSSIBLE AND
THAT'S STILL VERY IMPORTANT IN
TERMS OF LOOKING AT THE
CRITERIA SO MOST OF THE
CRITERIA THAT WE HAVE RIGHT NOW
ARE ABLE TO BE AUTOMATICALLY
SCORED THROUGH OUR SYSTEM AND
THAT'S VERY IMPORTANT IN TERMS
OF YOU KNOW, MANAGING THAT
PRIORITIZATION AND KEEPING IT
UP TO DATE BECAUSE AS THINGS
CHANGE IN THE GYM AND
AUTOMATICALLY UPDATE SCORES SO
SO THE PRIORITIZATION CRITERIA
I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH THESE
ONE AT A TIME SO YOU CAN BE
FAMILIAR WITH WHAT THEY ARE.
BUT BEFORE I GO INTO EACH ONE,
THE WAY THE SYSTEM WORKS AND
THERE IS INCLUDED IN YOUR
PACKET, THERE IS A MORE
DETAILED LISTING OF THE SCORING
AND HOW EXACTLY THE POINTS ARE
ALLOCATED AND ALL OF THAT I
WILL GO TO THAT MUCH DETAIL
HERE BUT IT'S THERE IF YOU'RE
INTERESTED EACH THERE'S NINE
CATEGORY NINE CATEGORIES THAT
WE SCORE ON IN EACH ONE
OF THOSE IS WORTH A MAXIMUM
OF TEN POINTS BUT NOT ALL
OF THOSE CATEGORIES ARE
NECESSARY OR SHOULD NECESSARILY
BE EQUAL EITHER AND WHAT WE DID
WAS WE WENT THROUGH A WEIGHTING
EXERCISE FOR EACH OF THE
PRIORITIZATION CRITERIA AND WE
USE THE SAME PROCESS THAT WE
USE IN THE SIPI SO THAT IS
CONSISTENT WITH THAT IN TERMS
OF DETERMINING WHAT WHICH
CRITERIA SHOULD BE WEIGHTED
MORE THAN OTHERS.
AND SO AS I GO THROUGH THE
PERCENTAGES YOU SEE IN
PARENTHESES AFTER IT ARE THE
RESULTS OF THAT PRIORITIZATION
ARE THAT THAT PROCESS OF OF
WEIGHTING SO GOING THROUGH
THESE THE FIRST ONE AND THERE
IN ORDER OF OF THEIR OF THEIR
WEIGHT PEDESTRIAN CRASHES IS
THE TOP ONE AND THIS IS A
PRETTY SIMPLE ONE BASICALLY THE
LOCATION GETS FOUR POINTS IF
THERE'S MORE THAN ONE PED AUTO
CRASH WITHIN THE LAST FIVE
YEARS WITHIN THREE HUNDRED FEET
OF THE GAP THERE'S NOT MANY
OF THOSE SO NOT MANY LOCATIONS
GET GET POINTS FOR THIS BUT
IT'S IT'S AN ALL OR NOTHING
TYPE THING AND THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE HAVE TO DO A LITTLE BIT
OF MANUAL WORK ON THAT TO PUT
THAT IN.
BUT IT'S RELATIVELY EASY TO DO
THE SECOND CRITERIA IS
PROXIMITY TO SCHOOLS.
OBVIOUSLY THAT'S THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT FACTOR FOR OUR SCHOOL
CHILDREN GETTING BEING ABLE TO
WALK TO AND FROM SCHOOL AND
THAT'S JUST A STRAIGHT UP
DISTANCE FROM A SCHOOL AND
THERE'S VARIOUS DIFFERENT BASED
ON THE DISTANCE THERE'S
DIFFERENT POINTS THAT IT'S
AWARDED.
>> THIRD CATEGORY IS EVIDENCE
OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT AND THIS
IS THIS IS KIND OF IMPORTANT
BECAUSE THIS IS THIS IS REALLY
THE ONLY CRITERIA THAT
RESIDENTS CAN DIRECTLY AFFECT.
SO IF IF SOMEBODY IS REALLY
INTERESTED IN GETTING CERTAIN
SIDEWALK GAP FILLED, THIS IS
WHERE THAT THEY CAN, YOU KNOW,
BOOST ONE GAP MAYBE OVER SOME
OF ITS PEERS I SUPPOSE.
AND IT'S SCORED SEVERAL
DIFFERENT WAYS.
A SINGLE REQUEST WILL GET AT
SOME POINTS BUT THEN SOMEBODY
CAN ALSO SUBMIT A PETITION AS
WELL AND BASED ON KIND OF THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO GET TO
SIGN THE PETITION, YOU GET MORE
AND MORE POINTS UP TO THE UP TO
THE FULL TEN.
THE OTHER NOTE ON HERE I DIDN'T
PUT IT IN BULLET POINT BUT ALSO
IF THERE'S EVIDENCE
OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT CAN ALSO
BE ACTUALLY PATHS WORN INTO THE
RIGHT OF WAY WHERE PEOPLE ARE
USING IT EVEN THOUGH THERE'S NO
SIDEWALK THERE.
SO THAT IS FACTORED INTO HERE
AS WELL.
AND ALSO IF WE GET REQUESTS
FROM AN ADVOCACY AT ADVOCACY
GROUP LIKE THE DISABILITIES
COMMISSION OR WHATNOT, THEN
THAT THAT GETS POINTS AS WELL.
SO AND THE DETAILS ON THAT
ATTACH SHEET, THE FOURTH ITEM
IS TRANSPORTATION EQUITY AND
THAT'S BASED ON THIS MAP HERE
THAT YOU SEE IN THE PICTURE AND
THIS COMES OUT OF IT'S NOT ON
THE TRANSPORT PLAN BUT IT'S IN
AGREEMENT CAN CORRECT ME WHEN I
GET THIS WRONG BUT SOME OF THE
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS I THINK SO
AND THIS IS PRETTY SIMPLE.
>> THERE'S FIVE CATEGORIES
THERE AND IT BASICALLY GETS TWO
POINTS PER CATEGORY AS IT MOVES
UP THE KIND OF THE EQUITY CHART
THERE NUMBER FIVE OUT OF OUR
NINE CATEGORIES THE ROAD
CLASSIFICATION WHETHER IT'S A
LOCAL VERSUS A MAJOR PRIMARILY
.
AND THE IDEA BEHIND THAT IS
THAT IF WE DON'T HAVE SIDEWALKS
AND MAJOR STREETS WITH HIGHER
VOLUMES OF TRAFFIC WITH FASTER
MOVING TRAFFIC THAT THOSE GAPS
WOULD SCORE MORE POINTS BASED
ON SORT OF A SORT OF PROXY FOR
SAFETY TO SOME DEGREE.
BUT WE ALSO CAPTURE IN THIS THE
CONCEPT OF WHETHER THERE'S
SIDEWALK EXISTING ON ONE SIDE
OF THE ROAD OR NOT ALREADY
BECAUSE THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT
WAS SUGGESTED IN ONE OF THE
PREVIOUS REVISIONS THAT WAS
ADDED THAT YOU KNOW, A LOCATION
THAT HAS NO SIDEWALK ON IT,
EITHER SIDE OF THE STREET
SHOULD MAYBE BE A HIGHER
PRIORITY THAN OTHER LOCATIONS
THAT THE DON'T SO NUMBER SIX IS
PROXIMITY TO VARIOUS DIFFERENT
ATTRACTORS.
I DON'T HAVE MY MY LIST IS ON
ANOTHER SCREEN HERE BUT THOSE
VARIOUS OTHER FACTORS PARKS,
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS, LIBRARIES
,SHOPPING AREAS, THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO AND THAT'S JUST STANDARD
DISTANCE BASED ON THE DISTANCE.
THE CLOSER IT IS IT GETS MORE
SO THEN WE HAVE PROXIMITY TO
TRANSIT.
THAT'S BASICALLY THOSE JUST THE
STRAIGHT DISTANCE FROM YOUR BUS
STOPS AND PRETTY STRAIGHT
FORWARD THERE.
NUMBER EIGHT IS IS IS
REFERENCING A TRANSPORTATION
PLAN IN THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
WE HAVE LOCATION SO THAT ARE
IDENTIFIED AS CRITICAL GAPS.
SO IF IT'S ON THAT LIST IT GETS
POINTS FOR THIS CATEGORY AND IF
IT'S NOT IT DOESN'T.
AND THEN FINALLY THE LAST ONE
IS WHETHER OR NOT THE GAP IS
ADJACENT TO A CITY OWNED
PARCEL.
WE KIND OF JOKED BEFORE BECAUSE
WE WE KIND OF INFORMALLY
CONSIDER THIS THE SHAME ON YOU
FACTOR.
SO IF IT'S NEXT TO A CITY
PARCEL AND WE HAVEN'T FILLED
THE GAP YET THAT IT SHOULD GET
SOME POINTS FOR THAT.
AS YOU SEE, THIS IS THE
ACTUALLY THE LOWEST SCORED ONE
OR THE LOWEST WEIGHTED CRITERIA
AND A NOTE HERE THAT'S KIND
OF IMPORTANT TO US.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THESE ARE
ADJACENT TO CITY PARKS AND AS
YOU CAN SEE IN THE EXAMPLE
RIGHT THERE NEXT TO ELIMINATING
OR PARK SO KIND OF THE THE
NUANCE ON THAT IS THAT BECAUSE
THE SIDEWALK MILEAGE CAN'T
FOR FILLING SIDEWALK GAPS
ADJACENT TO NONTAXABLE HERZL'S
OUR PARKS DEPARTMENT ACTUALLY
HAS TO FUND THESE SO IT NEEDS
TO AS WE WORK ON GAPS IN THESE
AREAS, WE NEED TO WORK WITH OUR
PARKS DEPARTMENT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY'VE GOT IT KIND
OF PRIORITIZED AS WELL.
>> SO ALL OF THAT ALL OF THOSE
CRITERIA AND ALL OF THE WEIGHTS
THAT GO ALONG WITH THEM THEN
FEED INTO THE CALCULUS TO COME
UP WITH A SCORE FOR FOR EACH
GAP AND THE RESULTS THAT CAN BE
SEEN ON OUR DASHBOARD.
MAYBE YOU MAY REMEMBER LAST
MONTH WHEN TALKED ABOUT
DASHBOARDS WE HAVE ANOTHER
DASHBOARD FOR THIS AS WELL AT A
TWO UPGRADE TO SIDEWALK THE
APPS
AND ANYBODY CAN COME IN
AND AND TAKE A LOOK AT THAT.
WE HAVE SOME KIND OF DASHBOARD
INFORMATION ABOUT MILES THE
SIDEWALK AND ALL THAT KIND
OF THING AND ALSO SHOWS THE YOU
CAN CLICK ON AN INDIVIDUAL ONE
TO SEE WHAT ITS SCORE WAS AND
WE KIND OF HAVE A CATEGORIES
CATEGORIZED INTO THESE SIX
DIFFERENT CATEGORIES THAT YOU
SEE DOWN AT THE LOWER RIGHT
OF THE SCREEN.
THEY'RE FROM HIGHEST PRIORITY
DOWN TO THE LOWEST PRIORITY.
OK, SO ON PROGRAMING WE WE SO
WE USE THAT DASHBOARD AND WHERE
IT LIVES IN OUR EYES A LOT IS
WE'RE GOING INTO TRYING TO
PROGRAM SIDEWALK PROJECTS AND
SO WE TAKE THE RESULTS FROM
THAT PRIORITIZATION SYSTEM,
LOOK AT THOSE SCORES AND WE USE
THAT TO CREATE ACTUAL PROJECTS
IN THE SIPI SO LARGER GAPS,
LARGER BIGGER EXPENSIVE
PROJECTS MAYBE SOME IN CASE
SOME HIGHER SCORING CLUSTERS
MIGHT GET PUT INTO THE AS A
STANDALONE PROJECT ITSELF.
SO AN ACTUAL NAMED PROJECT.
SO THE SMALLER A LITTLE BITS
OF GAPS HERE AND THERE WE DON'T
PUT ALL OF THOSE IN AS THEIR
OWN PROJECTS.
INSTEAD WE KIND OF HAVE AN
ANNUAL SIDEWALK GAP FILLING
GENERAL CATCHALL CATEGORY.
IT'S KIND OF SIMILAR TO WHAT WE
DO WITH A LOCAL AND MAJOR
STREETS IN THE CITY.
SO SOME OF THE SMALL GAPS WILL
GET PICKED UP IN THAT KIND
OF ANNUAL GAP FILLING PROGRAM
AND THEN WE ALSO LOOK TO IT AS
WE DO THE SIPI AND THOSE
PROJECTS THAT SOME OF OUR ROAD
TO OTHER ROAD UTILITY PROJECTS
AND WHETHER THEY HAVE GAPS
ALONG THEM AND IF GENERALLY
WE'RE LOOKING AT CATEGORIES
THAT ARE IN ANYWHERE FROM
MINHAI TO HIGHEST THE TOP THREE
CATEGORIES ON THAT IF IF A GAP
SCORES IN THERE THEN WE WILL
CONSIDER LOOKING AT INCLUDING
IT IN THAT OTHER PROJECT
WHETHER IT'S A ROAD RESURFACING
OR A WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
PROJECT OR WHATNOT.
YOU KNOW, IF THE IF THE IF IT'S
FEASIBLE AND IF THE IF THE
FUNDING IS AVAILABLE FOR LIKE I
SAID WE HAVE WE HAVE A LIMITED
AMOUNT OF FUNDING FOR THIS SO
WE WE DO WHAT WE CAN TO TRY TO
INCLUDE THAT IN EXISTING
PROJECTS, TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF WHAT'S ALREADY HAPPENING,
CHALLENGES, CERTAINLY REMOVING
THE THE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT WAS
ALLEVIATING A MAJOR CHALLENGE
IN FILLING SIDEWALKS.
BUT THERE'S STILL OTHERS
THERE'S A TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
AND I'LL MENTION THE PICTURE I
SELECTED FOR A SLIDE RIGHT NOW
THAT'S ON GATTI'S ROAD OUT ON
THE EAST EDGE OF THE CITY AND I
SELECTED THAT ONE BECAUSE IT
HIGHLIGHTS A BUNCH OF THESE
CHALLENGES.
THE FIRST ONE IS IS THE
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES JUST WITH
GRADES AND HOW ACTUALLY
TECHNICALLY DIFFICULT IT WOULD
BE TO BUILD A SIDEWALK AT A
LOCATION.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE PICTURE YOU
SEE GUARDRAIL ON BOTH SIDES
OF THE STREET WE PUT GUARDRAIL
IN WHEN THERE'S A ON
EITHER SIDE OF THE ROAD.
RIGHT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO PUT SIDEWALK
THERE.
THE SECOND CHALLENGE IS TREE
IMPACTS ON A YOU KNOW, IN A
MORE TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL AREA.
WE'LL DO WHATEVER WE CAN.
WE'LL WORK WITH PROPERTY
OWNERS.
WE'LL TRY TO GO AROUND TREES.
BUT THERE'S ALWAYS GOING TO BE
SOME IMPACTS WHEN WE DO
SIDEWALK OUT.
SO THAT'S THAT'S A MAJOR
CHALLENGE.
AND AGAIN, THIS SLIDE
HIGHLIGHTS THAT AS WELL AS YOU
CAN SEE TREES ON BOTH SIDES
OF THE ROAD AT A PLACE WHERE WE
WOULD CONSIDER PUTTING A
SIDEWALK SO AND BOTH OF THOSE
THINGS REALLY LEAD TO THE THIRD
ONE WHICH IS COST IN SOME CASES
WE HAVE SOME PRETTY HIGH
SCORING PROJECTS THAT ARE GOING
TO BE VERY, VERY EXPENSIVE TO
DO AND WILL TAKE MORE THAN ONE
YEAR'S WORTH OF THE SIDEWALK
MILEAGE IN ORDER TO COMPLETE.
THIS WOULD BE ONE OF THOSE
EXAMPLES.
AND THEN FINALLY THERE'S THE
ELIMINATION OF THE SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT DID NOT ENTIRELY
ELIMINATE RESIDENT OPPOSITION
EITHER OFTENTIME SIDEWALK GAPS
ARE SUPPORTED BY THE COMMUNITY
IN GENERAL BUT LESS SO OFTEN
TIMES IS THE CASE WITH THE
ACTUAL ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS
AND SO A LOT OF TIME WILL MEET
A LOT OF RESISTANCE TO THESE
PROJECTS FROM THAT SIDE
OF THINGS.
>> SO REAL QUICK I'M JUST GOING
TO RUN THROUGH SOME JUST SO YOU
CAN GET KIND OF A PREVIEW
OF WHAT'S COMING UP IN THE NEXT
FEW YEARS I DON'T HAVE THE
FULL LIMITS ON HERE.
IF ANYBODY HAS ANY QUESTIONS
LATER ON I CAN CERTAINLY OR
LOOK IN THE CHP OR WHATNOT TO
SEE MORE DETAILS ON THESE
PROJECTS.
BUT THIS YEAR WE'VE GOT
SIDEWALK MAPS GOING IN BEING
FILLED ON BROADWAY ON BROOKS
IROHA NEWPORT INSIDE CHURCH AS
WELL NEXT YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR WE'VE GOT THE BIG ONE
COMING UP WHICH IS PICTURED
RIGHT THERE IN THAT IN THAT
BOTTOM PICTURE THAT'S MAIN
STREET EAST SIDE CROSS FROM
PIONEER NEXT TO THE GOLF
COURSES THERE THE NUMBER ONE
SCORER SIDEWALK GAP IN THE CITY
RIGHT THERE.
SO THAT ONE IS SLATED FOR
TWENTY POINT FOUR AND WILL UP
A BIG CHUNK OF THE BUDGET.
ALSO SEVERAL OTHER LOCATIONS
THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
TWENTY FOUR HOUR AGO BEAKS AND
ST. SCHOOL AS WELL.
>> AND WHEN WE'RE HERE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE WE'VE GOT SIDEWALK
GAPS KIND OF PENCILED IN FOR
BROCKMANN AND CROSSLIN BERTEN
DRIVE UP KNIERIM FOURTEEN AND
THE APPLE PEAR AREA WHICH IS UP
ON THE EAST SIDE OF PONTIAC
TRAIL KIND OF NEAR NORTH SIDE
STIEHM TWENTY TWENTY SIX WE'VE
GOT DEXTRA ROAD THAT IS GOING
TO BE A BIG ONE THERE IS ALSO
GOING TO PULL OUT OF THE
BUDGET FOR THAT YEAR AS WELL.
ALL RIGHT AND SO ALL OF THAT
SAID I WILL I WILL END THE
PRESENTATION THERE AND WE CAN
TAKE ANY QUESTIONS THAT YOU
MIGHT HAVE I A QUESTION THERE
WE GO.
OK I'M UNSHARED.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH NICK.
WHAT QUESTIONS DO PEOPLE
EMMOTT'S PETER UM, NICK I
THOUGHT I HEARD YOU SAY THAT
THE MILITARY CAN BE USED FOR
PARCELS ON THE TAX ROLLS.
DID I DO THAT?
YOU SAID ISN'T ISN'T MAIN
STREET ADJACENT TO UNIVERSITY
GOLF COURSE?
>> IT IS AND THE UNIVERSITY IS
ACTUALLY COMMITTED AS A PARTNER
ON THAT AND WILL BE PAYING FOR
A PORTION PORTION OF THAT
PROJECT.
SO THAT ACTUALLY HAS HELPED
FREE UP A LITTLE BIT OF THE
BUDGET FOR THAT PROJECT.
WE'RE ALSO GETTING FEDERAL AID
FOR THAT PROJECT AS WELL.
SO OK, BUT IT'S NOT THAT
PROPERTY IS NOT ON THE TAX
ROLLS.
>> IT IS NOT.
NO, BUT NOT USING THE MILLAGE.
>> WE'RE NOT USING THE
MILITARY.
WE ARE USING THE VILLAGE FOR
PART OF THAT BECAUSE THAT'S NOT
ALL THE THE UNIVERSITY'S
PROPERTY AND OUR GOLF AND
OUTINGS CORNER THERE AND THEY
ARE TAX PAYING PARCELS SO WE
WILL BE USING PART OF SOME
OF THE VILLAGE MONEY FOR THAT
PROJECT.
>> OK, I I GUESS I WILL ALSO
OBSERVE AS YOU DID THAT I
HAVEN'T NOTICED THAT THE
VILLAGE HAS APPRECIABLY
DECREASED RESIDENT OPPOSITION
AT ALL AND WE SEE A LOT
OF OPPOSITION FOR SOME REASON
THAT I DON'T UNDERSTAND TO
FILLING SIDEWALK GAPS SO EVEN
TONIGHT WE SAW OR HEARD IT.
OK, THANK YOU DERMO.
>> YEAH JUST ME.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THIS
PRESENTATION AND THE
DASHBOARD'S WHICH I'VE BEEN
LOOKING AT UH AS WE'VE BEEN
TALKING UM YOU KNOW I THINK
REFERENCING THE FACT THAT WE
HAVE GOTTEN SO MUCH PUSHBACK ON
THE ERHART UH SIDEWALK GAP I'M
SORRY TO PUT YOU ON THE SPOT SO
FEEL FREE TO PUSH THIS OFF BUT
I WAS WONDERING IF YOU COULD
SPEAK DIRECTLY TO LIKE YOU
TALKED ABOUT THE SCORING SYSTEM
BECAUSE YOU TALKED TO APPLIED
TO THIS PROJECT.
>> YEAH, I CAN IT'S WELL OK.
I MIGHT PUT THAT OFF A LITTLE
BIT BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE A LOT
OF THE DETAILS IN FRONT OF ME
RIGHT THERE FOR THAT SPECIFIC
LOCATION.
BUT YOU KNOW, BEING THAT IT'S
ADJACENT TO A PROJECT THAT
WE'RE WORKING ON RIGHT NOW, IT
WAS IT WAS SOMETHING THAT WE
FELT WAS AN IMPORTANT ELEMENT
TO INCLUDE IN THE PROJECT AS
WERE, YOU KNOW, DOING A LOT
OF OTHER THINGS THE ROAD TO
IMPROVE VEHICULAR PEDESTRIAN
BICYCLE SAFETY.
THAT WAS AN IMPORTANT ELEMENT
THAT NEEDED TO BE INCLUDED AS
WELL.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF THAT REALLY
ANSWERS YOUR QUESTION BUT IT
DOES PERSONALLY.
BUT IT WAS ALSO MY
UNDERSTANDING THAT THERE WAS
QUITE A BIT OF THE COMMUNITY
SUPPORT FOR THIS VOICED IN
NUMEROUS MEETINGS AND I'M NOT
SURE OF I THINK IT WAS
IDENTIFIED AS THE CRITICAL GAP
BY THE CITY.
>> I'M KIND OF WONDERING ABOUT
THOSE OTHER FACTORS WE DID HEAR
I I WASN'T ATTENDING MYSELF
SOME OF THE PUBLIC MEETINGS
THAT WE HAD ON THAT PROJECT
SUPPORT FOR THE SIDEWALK AND
THAT GOES BACK TO WHAT I KIND
OF MENTIONED BEFORE IS THAT IN
GENERAL THE THE COMMUNITY
SUPPORTS FILLING SIDEWALK GAPS
BUT WHERE WHERE THE OPPOSITION
REALLY COMES IS THE ADJACENT
PROPERTY OWNERS IN MOST CASES.
>> SO AND I THINK YOUR HEART IS
AN EXAMPLE OF THAT AND I THINK
IT'S IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT THE
NETWORK EFFECTS OF THESE
SIDEWALKS AND REGIONAL
CONNECTIVITY.
SO IT'S NOT JUST MEANT TO SERVE
THE ADJACENT
PROPERTY, IT'S NOT
TO SERVE OUR COMMUNITY AND OUR
WAY TO GET FROM PLACE TO PLACE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
YES, IT'S SIDEWALKS ARE REALLY
A COMMUNITY ASSET AND AND
THAT'S PART OF THE REASON THAT
IT KIND OF MADE SENSE TO TAKE
AWAY THE SPECIAL SUSSMAN ASPECT
OF IT AS WELL THAT YOU KNOW,
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT KIND
OF SPEAKS TO, YOU KNOW, THE
BENEFITING PROPERTY OWNERS
PAYING FOR IT.
BUT IT'S YOU KNOW, THE ADJACENT
PROPERTY OWNERS ARE NOT THE
ONLY BENEFICIARIES.
IT'S REALLY A COMMUNITY BENEFIT
.
I ACTUALLY DO HAVE A FOLLOW UP
QUESTION.
SO SAY A CONDOMINIUM
DEVELOPMENT CAME UP TODAY.
WHAT WOULD BE THE REQUIREMENTS
IN TERMS OF CREATING SIDEWALK
ALONG WITH THAT DEVELOPMENT OR
DOES THAT EXIST?
>> YOU KNOW, THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR A NEW DEVELOPMENT TO BUILD
SIDEWALKS STILL EXIST.
THIS IN FACT THAT WAS ACTUALLY
CAPTURED AND I THINK THE
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION THAT
WENT ALONG WITH THAT WITH THE
VILLAGE IN THAT THIS DOES NOT
EXCUSE A NEW DEVELOPMENT FROM
BUILDING SIDEWALKS ADJACENT TO
THEIR PROPERTY.
>> AND SO THE FACT THAT THIS
PARTICULAR KIND OF DEVELOPMENT
DOESN'T HAVE SIDEWALKS ON ITS
PROPERTY IS A RELIC OF NOT
HAVING THIS REQUIREMENT IN THE
PAST I WOULD SUSPECT SO, YEAH.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHEN THIS
DEVELOPMENT WHEN THE THAT CONDO
DEVELOPMENT ACTUALLY OCCURRED
BUT MY GUESS IT WAS MANY, MANY
DECADES GO AND THAT I WOULD
PRESUME THAT THAT REQUIREMENT
DIDN'T EXIST AT THE TIME.
>> BUT OUR STANDARD NOW AND IN
THE RECENT PAST HAS BEEN THAT
SIDEWALKS GET INSTALLED BY THE
DEVELOPER, CORRECT?
YES.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
I THANK YOU VERY MUCH, NICK,
FOR BRINGING THIS TO US I THINK
IS A GOOD REFRESHER.
OUR NEW INFORMATION FOR A LOT
OF PEOPLE, A LOT OF YOUR STUFF
HERE FOR ME TO ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON THEN LET'S SEE STUFF
COMMUNICATIONS STAFF REPORT AND
UPDATES RAYMOND IS GOING TO
REVIEW SOME HIGHLIGHTS AND
THING.
>> WE ARE RUNNING A LITTLE LATE
SO MAYBE BREADED WITH YOUR
PERMISSION.
I'LL RUN THROUGH THEM
RELATIVELY QUICKLY.
IT'S HARD TO BELIEVE WE WERE
GOING TO TRY TO PRETEND TO GET
THROUGH RESURFACING
PRESENTATION TONIGHT AS WELL.
SO IT'S PROBABLY A GOOD THI
THAT POSTPONED.
YEAH.
SO I WILL SHARE SCREAM LIKE I
HAVE BEEN DOING AS OF LATE JUST
TO SHOW YOU ALL MY NOTES THAT I
REVIEW.
SO LET ME KNOW HOPEFULLY THAT
IS THAT SHARING RIGHT SCREEN
THE TRANSPORTATION PROJECT
UPDATES YES.
OK THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT SPLATT ROAD FROM
HERE ON PARKWAY TO PACKER
CONSTRUCTION IS SCHEDULED TO
BEGIN IN APRIL.
KEEP AN EYE OUT FOR THAT
SIMILARLY BROADWAY STREET FROM
PLYMOUTH TO PLYMOUTH WILL ALSO
BEGIN IN APRIL.
EARHART ROAD IS ANTICIPATED TO
START THIS SUMMER.
THAT'S WHAT WE'VE HEARD A LOT
ABOUT RECENTLY.
THIS IS FROM US TWENTY THREE TO
KATIE'S ROAD EAST MEDICAL
CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE.
THERE WAS A SUBSTITUTE
RESOLUTION WHICH WAS APPROVED
BY COUNCIL AT A MEETING ON THE
TWENTY FIRST WHICH WAS AFTER
YOUR MEETING LAST TIME AND
THAT'S GOING TO THAT DIRECTED
STAFF TO CONTINUE TO WORK WITH
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TO
ENHANCE THE PEDESTRIAN AND ON
MOTORIZED INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE
BRIDGE.
THE REDESIGN WORK IS GOING TO
HAPPEN THIS YEAR AND
CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED TO
HAPPEN IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
BROOKS STREET WILL COMPLETE
SIDEWALKS ON BOTH SIDES FOR THE
ENTIRE LENGTH OF THE PROJECT.
SPEAKING OF SIDEWALK APPS AND
CONSTRUCTION IS ANTICIPATED TO
BEGIN THIS YEAR.
SAINT HILL IMPROVEMENT'S FINAL
DESIGN CHANGES DO INCLUDE A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE THE LENGTH
OF THE PROJECT TO TEN AND A
HALF TRAVEL LANES TO FACILITATE
BUS OPERATIONS.
I WILL NOTE I WAS WHEN I WAS
KIND OF PUTTING TOGETHER MY
NOTES FOR THIS OR HIGHLIGHTS
THERE WAS SECTION THAT WAS
DROPPED WHICH SAYS BIDDING
THROUGH AND HAS BEEN DELAYED
AND AT THIS TIME IT'S
ANTICIPATED THAT CONSTRUCTION
MAY NOT BEGIN UNTIL LATE MAY OR
JUNE.
THE PROJECT MAY END UP GETTING
SPLIT SO THAT WORK ON STATE
STREET IS DONE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND WORK ON HILL IS DONE
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
MORE INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED
WHEN AVAILABLE SOUTH MAIN
STREET WATER MAIN AND
RESURFACING.
YOU'VE BEEN DOWNTOWN YOU'VE
PROBABLY SEEN THIS CONSTRUCTION
HAS BEGUN ON PHASE ONE AND MAIN
STREET IS CLOSED TO VEHICULAR
TRAFFIC BETWEEN LANE AND
LIBERTY CURRENT PHASE IS
EXPECTED TO LAST THROUGH EARLY
MAY.
MOVING ON TO PROJECTS AND
DESIGN GREENVIEW STADIUM THE
OF CHURCH THERE IS ACTUALLY A
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT MEETING
SCHEDULED FOR TOMORROW NIGHT.
SO IF YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH THE
AREA FEEL FREE TO GO TO THAT.
I BELIEVE IT'S UP TO PITTSFIELD
BRANCH LIBRARY ROANOKE VALLEY
WHERE THAT'S GOING TO BE HELD.
THIS IS A RESURFACING AND WATER
MAIN PROJECT AND THEN AS PART
OF THE DISCUSSION WITH THE
COMMUNITY WILL BE LOOKING AT
WAYS TO HALT TRAFFIC AND ADD
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES BIKE
FACILITY MILLER AVENUE FROM
SHAPIN TO NEWPORT INCLUDES
WATER MAIN STORMWATER ROAD
RESURFACING CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS AN ALL AGES BIKE
FACILITY DESIGN WORK JUST
STARTED BUT THE HOPE IS
CONSTRUCTION WILL HAPPEN NEXT
YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
STATE STREET AND NORTH YOU THIS
IS KIND OF THE EXTENSION OF THE
PROJECT THAT YOU SAW LAST YEAR
OF STATE STREET FROM WILLIAM TO
SMU AND THEN NC STATE BUT YOUR
WORK INCLUDES WATER MAIN
STORMWATER STREET RESURFACING
SANITARY SEWER WORK ON FIRE AND
THEN ALSO BIKE LANES ON NORTH U
INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS AT
ST..
S YOU AND OTHER CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS WILL BE PART
OF THE DISCUSSION THAT PROJECT
IS ALSO EXPECTED FOR NEXT YEAR
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PITTSFIELD VILLAGE IMPROVEMENTS
INCLUDE SEVERAL DIFFERENT
THINGS ON PITTSVILLE BOULEVARD
WHITEWOOD AND PINECREST SUCH AS
WATER MAIN STORM IMPROVEMENT,
SANITARY SEWER AND ROAD
RESURFACING.
THAT PROJECT IS EXPECTED TO
OCCUR OR BE CONSTRUCTED IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
YOU'VE GOT THE UPDATE ON THE
EBIX SO I CAN GO PAST THAT AND
NOT WE'RE CONTINUING TO ADVANCE
DISCUSSIONS WITH THEM ABOUT THE
INTERSECTION OF JACKSON AND
DEXTER DENHA WHERE THE SPLIT IS
THERE AND HAS AGREED TO A
SIGNAL MODERNIZATION WHICH WILL
ADD A NEW CROSSWALK TO THE
EASTERN LEG OF THAT
INTERSECTION.
SO CROSSING HURON AND IT WILL
BE AN ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL AS WELL THAT IS EXPECTED
TO BE CONSTRUCTED IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR AND THEN THERE ARE
ALSO IS AN INTERSECTION
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT AT HURON
SEVENTH WHERE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
MODERNIZATION WILL OCCUR THAT
WILL INCLUDE ACCESSIBLE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AND THEN IT
WILL INCLUDE NORTHBOUND SEVENTH
STREET LEFT TURN LANE
INSTRUCTED AS EXPECTED FALL
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE
STREETLIGHTS.
NEW STREET LIGHTS WERE
INSTALLED AT GETTY'S WALNUT AND
GATTI'S LINDEN AND TREVER
TUEBINGEN TRAFFIC CALMING IS
KIND OF MARCHING ALONG SO
GRANGER FROM STATE'S PACARD HAD
ITS SECOND MEETING IN FEBRUARY.
THE OTHER SECTION OF RANGER
FROM FOREST TO OLIVIA HAD ITS
FIRST MEETING RIGHT AFTER YOUR
LAST MEETING ON FEBRUARY 16TH
AND THEN FULLMER FAMILIAR
FARSAD ITS FIRST MEETING ON THE
TWENTY THIRD OF FEBRUARY AND
BALDWIN HAD ITS FIRST MEETING.
I THINK THAT WAS ACTUALLY
TONIGHT THERE'S A TYPO HERE
THAT'S THE MEETING CYNTHIA WAS
AT BEFORE SHE JOINED US SO A
LOT OF TRAFFIC COMING PETITIONS
KIND OF MOVING THROUGH THE
PROCESS NOW AS A REMINDER WE DO
HAVE A CONSULTANT THAT'S
HELPING US WITH THAT AND IN THE
NEXT MEETING OF THE TRAFFIC
SUBCOMMITTEE WILL BE NEXT WEEK
ON THE TWENTY FIRST UM A LOT
OF THINGS ON THE TRANSPORTATION
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN UPDATE THE
VISION IS THERE A SUBCOMMITTEE
HAD THEIR LAST MEETING ON THE
TWENTY SEVENTH WHERE THEY
LOOKED AT SOME OF THE TECHNICAL
DEMOS, AN ANNUAL SNAPSHOT.
THEIR NEXT MEETING WILL BE ON
APRIL TWENTY FOURTH ON THAT
SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AS A
REMINDER, UM, WE DID CLOSE THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
AT THE END OF FEBRUARY WE
RECEIVED FIFTY FIVE COMMENTS.
WE'RE ACTUALLY THINKING ABOUT
DOING ANOTHER ROUND
OF ENGAGEMENT USING FOCUS
MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
KIND OF GETTING IT RIGHT.
SO WE'RE WORKING WITH THE SAME
SPORTS TEAM ON WHAT THAT MIGHT
LOOK LIKE.
I PROMISE TO TALK ABOUT THIS IN
MORE DETAIL IN THE MATTER TIME
WE MIGHT HAVE TO COME BACK TO
THIS BOAT.
I MENTIONED THE BIKE CROWD
PROGRAM THAT WE'RE CURRENTLY
PILOTING SO WE'RE CURRENTLY
RESEARCHING BIKE RACKS THAT WE
CAN GET AND THEN DEPLOY IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY OUTSIDE
OF DOWNTOWN.
AND SO YOU KNOW, THIS IS A CALL
TO ALL OF YOU HERE IF YOU HAVE
SUGGESTIONS FOR LOCATIONS, LET
ME KNOW THIS WILL BE A
RELATIVELY SMALL PILOT, A
HANDFUL OF LOCATIONS THAT WILL
DEPLOY AND THEN MONITOR AND
THEN HOPEFULLY MAYBE SCALING UP
AS WELL OR IF YOU KNOW
OF BUSINESSES OR OTHERS IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY OR ADJACENT
TO THE PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY THAT
WOULD SUPPORT SUCH BIKE TRAILS.
>> LET US KNOW ALL RIGHTS,
EDUCATION AND ENCOURAGEMENT.
>> SEVERAL THINGS ARE GOING ON.
WE'RE WORKING WITH THE
WASHINGTON BIKE OUR WALK BIKE
WASHTENAW ON BIKE MONTH
ACTIVITIES IN CONJUNCTION WITH
GET DOWNTOWN KIND OF TEAM THAT
UP AND THEN WE LAUNCHED A
SERIES OF VISION ZERO LUNCH AND
LEARNED THAT WE'RE HOSTED BY
CYNTHIA RENNINGER AND SUZANNE
FLOWERS FROM OUR TEAM.
THE IDEA IS TO KIND OF START
INSTITUTIONALIZED THE VISION
ZERO PLAN ACROSS THE ENTIRETY
OF THE CITY AMONG ALL
DEPARTMENTS.
SO WE'RE ENCOURAGING
PARTICIPATION AMONG ALL THE
DEPARTMENTS THAT WE HAVE A PART
TO PLAY IN THAT.
SO IT'S PRETTY EXCITING THAT
WE'RE TRYING TO NOT JUST DO
OUTWARD FACING EDUCATION BUT
INWARD FACING STUFF AS WELL AND
THEN ON THE OUTWARD FACING
EDUCATION SIDE WE ARE GOING TO
HOST A LEAGUE OF AMERICAN
BICYCLISTS CYCLING ONE TO ONE
COURSE IN MAY.
IT'S A TWO PART SERIES.
IT'S ROUGHLY A TEN HOUR COURSE
.
SO WE'RE GOING TO LOOK TO FILL
THAT SPACES ARE LIMITED.
SO IF YOU KNOW SOMEONE WHO
MIGHT BE INTERESTED, PLEASE
HAVE THEM GET IN TOUCH WITH
MYSELF OR SUZANNE FLOWERS AS
WE'RE STARTING TO KIND OF PUT
THAT INTO FOCUS
.
UM, OUR TEAM PUT IN A STRONGEST
TOWNE'S APPLICATION.
IT JUST KIND OF ACKNOWLEDGES
THE THINGS THAT A COMMUNITY IS
DOING FOR CREATING LIVABLE,
SAFE AND INVITING COMMUNITIES.
IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN VOTING
IN THIS COMPETITION FOR ANN
ARBOR OR FOR ONE OF THE OTHER
COMMUNITIES, THAT ROUND
OF VOTING OPENS NEXT WEEK.
I THINK IT'S ON THE 20TH AND
THEY'RE DOING IT SORT OF LIKE A
MARCH MADNESS BRACKET WHERE WE
ARE PITTED AGAINST SOME OTHER
COMMUNITY LET'S SAY IN ILLINOIS
AND PEOPLE GET TO VOTE.
WHICH OF THE TWO COMMUNITIES
SHOULD ADVANCE TO THE NEXT
ROUND.
>> SO KIND OF A FUN LITTLE
THING IF YOU'RE INTERESTED GO
TO THE STRONG TOWNS WEBSITE,
FIND MORE INFORMATION THERE ONED
BICYCLE PROFESSIONALS CYNTHIA
RENNINGER AND SUZANNE FLOWERS
ARE CO-CHAIRS OF THAT AND
THEY'RE HOSTING A PURE EXCHANGE
WITH MISSOURI AND KANSAS
CHAPTER OF APB.
SO THAT'S EXCITING.
>> AND THEN WE HAVE INCLUDED
SOME INFORMATION ON CRASHES.
I THINK SOME OF YOU ARE AWARE
OF THIS.
THERE WERE FOUR CRASHES THAT
INVOLVE PEDESTRIANS THIS YEAR.
THERE WAS AN INCAPACITATING
CRASH ON THE TWENTY FOURTH AT
THE INTERSECTION OF KINGSLEE IN
WHICH A PEDESTRIAN WAS STRUCK
BY VEHICLE.
THE SIGNAL WAS WORKING PROPERLY
AND AS YOU ALL KNOW, THIS IS ON
A STATE TRUNK LINE.
ADDITIONALLY AND HORRIFICALLY
THERE WAS A FATAL CRASH
INVOLVING PEDESTRIAN AT HURON
AND PARKVIEW IN WHICH A
PEDESTRIAN WAS STRUCK BY A
VEHICLE THAT WAS BACKING UP ALL
INFRASTRUCTURE WAS WORKING
PROPERLY.
THIS WAS A VERY KIND OF BIZARRE
SORT OF CRASH TRAGIC ALL THE
SAME.
>> BUT IT WAS A VERY UNIQUE
SITUATION.
SO IT'S HARD TO REALLY DISCERN
WHAT WHAT HAPPENED THERE.
LIKE I SAID, BOTH OF THOSE WERE
ON STATE TRUNK LINES ON HURON
AND THOSE HAVE BEEN SHARED WITH
THEM.
>> BUT THERE WERE ALSO TWO NON
INCAPACITATING CRASHES OR NOT
SERIOUS CRASHES.
ONE WAS ON THE 6TH OF MARCH AT
KATHERINE AND ENGLE'S WHEREBY A
VEHICLE FAILED TO STOP FOR A
PEDESTRIAN IN THE CROSSWALK AND
THEN THERE WAS ANOTHER CRASH ON
MARCH 18TH AT 7TH AND SNYDER
WHERE SIMILARLY A PEDESTRIAN
WAS IN THE CROSSWALK AND
MOTORIST FAILED TO STOP FOR
THEM IN THAT CROSSWALK.
SO THOSE ARE YOU KNOW, WE'RE
TRYING TO IN RESPONSE
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM YOU AND
SUGGESTIONS FROM YOU KIND
OF GIVE YOU A LITTLE BIT MORE
REAL TIME MONITORING OF THESE.
AND I WANT TO THANK MIKE
SCHERBA AND ANDY BAYNOR AND
OTHERS FROM THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT WHO HAVE BEEN QUICK
TO NOTIFY US OF THESE
SITUATIONS SO THAT WE CAN GO
OUT, ASSESS THEIR
INFRASTRUCTURE, THINGS THAT
SHOULD BE DONE IN THOSE
LOCATIONS.
>> SO WITH THAT I'M HAPPY TO
ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU MAY HAVE NOTICED WE ARE
HEILBRUNN RIGHT?
YEP.
THANK YOU, RAYMOND.
AS ALWAYS, PLEASE FEEL FREE TO
EMAIL REMENDER OR THE QUESTIONS
BUT YACINE DONE ANYWAY IN THE
INTEREST OF PETER IS SOMETHING
I DO.
IT IS QUICK CYO CHURCH I GATHER
THAT THERE'S A POSSIBILITY THAT
THAT PROJECT COULD BE DELAYED
BECAUSE OF WHAT HAPPENED ON
LIBERTY.
WE GOT THAT NOTICE THIS IS THAT
WHEN WILL THAT DECISION BE MADE
THAT INTEREST THEY WILL BE
STARTING WORK ON THE SIDE
CHURCH PROJECT ON MONDAY THE
OUR CURRENT UNDERSTANDING IS
THAT MS EXPECTS TO THE HIGHWAY
REOPENED HOPEFULLY MONDAY AS
WELL AFTER THEY'VE REMOVED THE
DAMAGED PORTIONS OF THE LIBERTY
BRIDGE.
LIBERTY WILL BE REOPENED WITH
ONE LANE OF TRAFFIC AND A
TEMPORARY SIGNAL ON EITHER
SIDE.
THAT'S NOT GOING TO BE GREAT
FOR OUR DETOUR BECAUSE THAT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE READY TO OUR
SOCIETY CHURCH SO INSTEAD WE'VE
CHANGED OUR LIMITS A LITTLE BIT
OR CHANGED OUR FACING A LITTLE
BIT SO THAT WHEN WE START WORK
ON MONDAY WE WILL BE LEAVING
THE SITE OF CHURCH AND MAPLE
INTERSECT AND OPEN.
SO THAT WILL REMAIN OPEN FOR
SOME TIME IN ORDER TO ACCOUNT
FOR THE FACT THAT WE WON'T BE
ABLE TO USE LIBERTY AS A DETOUR
AS WE HAD PLANNED.
EVENTUALLY WE WILL GET TO READ
DOING WHAT WE NEED DO IN THAT
INTERSECTION BUT I GUESS STAY
TUNED FOR THAT.
BUT THAT'S A GOOD POINT.
THANK YOU.
HEY, THANK YOU KNOW HE IS
REPORTS COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE
AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER
ORGANIZATION BUT INTEGRATED
BRIEF REPORTS AND UPDATES I CAN
PROVIDE ON BEHALF OF THEIR SO I
UNDERSTAND THE COVERAGE FOR
JANUARY IS SEVENTY SEVEN
PERCENT OF THE FREE PRESS.
WE'RE ALSO WORKING FROM THAT
OF THE MILITARY SERVICES, THE
20/20 FORCES EXPRESS TOMORROW
AND FRIDAY IS ALSO EMPLOYEE
APPRECIATION DAY.
SO IF ANYONE TAKES THE BUS IF
YOU WANT TO CONSIDER TAKING
YOUR SO I THINK THANK YOU MOLLY
.
YEAH THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
COMING COMMITTEE HAS BEEN
MEETING AND WE ARE GETTING
CLOSE TO HAVING SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS TO BRING TO THE
COMMISSION.
SO I THINK WE'RE LOOKING AT OUR
NEXT OUR APRIL MEETING AND
HAVING SOME SOME STUFF FOR THE
COMMISSION TO CONSIDER IN TERMS
OF NEXT STEPS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
TROPICALLY.
VERY MUCH LOOKING FORWARD TO
THAT.
THANK ANY OTHER LEADERS OVER
REPORTS.
OK, COMMISSIONER MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS AND THE GENERAL
COMMISSION COMMISSIONER
COMMUNICATIONS FROM ALL RIGHT.
>> LONG CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS
REAL QUICKLY SOME THINGS TO
EXPECT IN THE FUTURE.
MAYBE I'M STEALING YOUR THUNDER
HERE AND THEN WE'LL EXPECT A
BUDGET PRESENTATION THE
RESURFACING PROGRAM WE KNOW
ABOUT A TOPIC ON ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE NETWORK AND THE
DESIGN THEREOF PRESENTATION BY
SPIN AND YEAH OK OTHER TOPICS
REQUESTED PLEASE EMAIL RAYMON
MYSELF MEGHAN WITH ANY OTHER
AGENDA TOPIC REQUESTS LET'S SEE
.
RIGHT SO NEXT MEETING WILL BE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY APRIL 19TH,
7:00 P.M. AGAIN IT WILL BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING LIKE THIS ONE.
REMEMBER ANYTHING ELSE BEFORE I
START TIME AND AN ADJOURNMENT.
OK, WELL THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THIS HAS BEEN A MEMORABLE
MEETING FOR ME.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS TO
ADJOURN OUR MARCH 15TH TWENTY
TWENTY THREE MEETING NO
OBJECTIONS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MEETING ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU EVERYBODY.
THANKS EVERYBODY.
EVERY NIGHT